SECTION I
Gadhadã I-1
Continuously Engaging One’s Mind on God
1

On the night of Mãgshar sudi 4, Samvat 1876 [21 November
1819], Shriji Mahãrãj had come to the residential hall of the sãdhus
in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in
white clothes. At that time, an assembly of sãdhus as well as
devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj asked, “Which is the most difficult of
all spiritual endeavours?”

3

The brahmachãris, sãdhus and householders answered
according to their own understanding, but none could give a
satisfactory reply.

4

Shriji Mahãrãj then said, “Allow Me to answer. There is no
spiritual endeavour more difficult than to continuously engage one’s
mind on the form of God. The scriptures state that there is no
greater attainment for a person whose mind’s vrutti is constantly
focused on the form of God, because the form of God is like a
chintãmani. Just as a person who possesses a chintãmani attains
whatever he desires, a person whose mind’s vrutti is constantly
focused on the form of God can instantly see, if he so wishes, the
forms of jiva, ishwar, mãyã and Brahma. He can also see Vaikunth,
Golok, Brahmamahol and the other abodes of God. Therefore, there
is no spiritual endeavour more difficult nor is there any greater
attainment than to continuously engage one’s mind on the form of
God.”

5

Thereafter, the devotee Govardhanbhãi Sheth asked Shriji
Mahãrãj, “What is the nature of God’s mãyã?”

6

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “Mãyã is anything that obstructs a
devotee of God while meditating on God’s form.”

7

Then Muktãnand Swãmi inquired, “What type of body does a
devotee of God attain when he leaves his physical body, which is
composed of the five bhuts, and goes to the abode of God?”
The Vachanãmrut

1

8

Shriji Mahãrãj answered, “A devotee who has sought refuge in
Dharmakul will attain, by the wish of God, a divine body composed of
Brahma. When such devotees leave their body and go to the abode of
God, some go by sitting on Garud, some go by sitting on a chariot and
some go by sitting on a celestial vehicle. This is how they reach the
abode of God. Those who have mastered yogic samãdhi can actually
witness these events.”

9

Thereafter, the devotee Harji Thakkar asked Shriji Mahãrãj,
“Some have been practising satsang for quite some time, yet they do
not harbour the same profound love for the Satsang fellowship as
they do for their own body and relatives. What is the reason for
this?”

10

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “Such a person has not fully realised
the greatness of God. Consequently, when the Sant – by whose
association God’s greatness is fully realised – talks to him about his
swabhãvs, the person is not able to overcome them. Instead, he bears
an aversion towards the Sant. It is due to this sin that he does not
develop intense love for the Satsang fellowship. After all, sins
committed elsewhere are washed away through association with the
Sant, but sins committed against the Sant are washed away only by
the grace of the Sant himself, not by any other means. The
scriptures also state:

•ãÿˇÊòÊ ∑§ÎÃ¢ ¬Ê¬¢ ÃËÕ¸ˇÊòÊ ÁflŸ‡ÿÁÃ–
ÃËÕ¸ˇÊòÊ ∑§ÎÃ¢ ¬Ê¬¢ flÖÊ˝‹¬Ù ÷ÁflcÿÁÃH i

i Anya-kshetre krutam pãpam teertha-kshetre vinashyati |

Teertha-kshetre krutam pãpam vajra-lepo bhavishyati ||
Sins committed elsewhere are destroyed at a place of pilgrimage; [but] sins
committed at a place of pilgrimage are as if etched in iron [i.e. totally
irredeemable].
Skand Purãn

The Vachanãmrut

2

Therefore, if one does not bear an aversion towards the Sant, one
develops profound love for the Satsang fellowship.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-1 || 1 ||

Gadhadã I-2
Three Levels of Vairãgya
1

On the night of Mãgshar sudi 5, Samvat 1876 [22 November
1819], Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in
Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, an
assembly of sãdhus as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Mayãrãm Bhatt asked Shriji Mahãrãj, “Mahãrãj,
please describe the characteristics of the highest, intermediate and
lowest levels of vairãgya?”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “A person who has the highest level of
vairãgya engages in worldly activities, either by God’s command or
as a consequence of his prãrabdha karmas. But, like King Janak, he
is not affected by those activities. He may indulge in the most
alluring of the panchvishays – sights, sounds, smells, tastes and
touch – attained as a consequence of his own prãrabdha, but he does
so dejectedly and with total indifference towards them. Those
vishays are unable to entice him; thus, his renunciation remains
undiminished. He invariably views those vishays as flawed and
treats them like enemies. Moreover, he constantly remains in
contact with sãdhus and the sacred scriptures, and remains in the
service of God. Even if he were to encounter adverse places, times,
company, etc.1, his understanding would not diminish. Such a
person is said to possess the highest level of vairãgya.

4

"A person who has an intermediate level of vairãgya also
indulges in the best of the panchvishays and remains unattracted to
them. But, if he were to encounter adverse places, times, company,
etc., he would become attached to those vishays. Consequently, his
level of vairãgya would diminish. Such a person is said to possess an
intermediate level of vairãgya.

5

“As for a person who has the lowest level of vairãgya, if he were
to encounter ordinary or inferior vishays, he may indulge in them,
but he would not become bound by them. However, if he were to
The Vachanãmrut

3

encounter and indulge in appealing vishays, he would become bound
by them. Such a person is said to possess the lowest level of
vairãgya.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-2 || 2 ||

Gadhadã I-3
Remembering the Divine Actions and Incidents of
God
1

On the night of Mãgshar sudi 6, Samvat 1876 [23 November
1819], Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in
Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, an
assembly of munis as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Even one who can constantly
see the form of God in his heart should recall the divine actions and
incidents of God performed in His various avatãrs in various places.
He should also maintain affection for the brahmachãris, sãdhus and
satsangis, and should remember them as well. Why? Because if at
the time of death he forgets God’s form, but remembers the divine
actions and incidents performed by Him at various places, or if he
remembers those satsangis, brahmachãris or sãdhus, then by that
association, God’s form will also be remembered. Thereby, that
person attains an elevated spiritual status and benefits
tremendously. That is why I perform grand Vishnu-yãgs; annually
celebrate Janmãshtami, Ekãdashi and other observances; and gather
brahmachãris, sãdhus and satsangis on these occasions. After all,
even if a sinner remembers these occasions at the time of his death,
he will also attain the abode of God.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-3 || 3 ||

Gadhadã I-4
Jealousy like that of Nãradji
1

On Mãgshar sudi 7, Samvat 1876 [24 November 1819], Shriji
Mahãrãj was sitting in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was
dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, an assembly of
The Vachanãmrut

4

sãdhus as well as devotees from various places had gathered before
Him.
2

Then Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Devotees of God should not harbour
jealousy amongst themselves.”

3

Thereupon Ãnandãnand Swãmi said, “But Mahãrãj, even then,
jealousy still remains.”

4

Hearing this, Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “If one does harbour
jealousy, it should be like that of Nãradji. Once, both Nãradji and
Tumbaru went to Vaikunth for the darshan of Lakshmi and
Nãrãyan. There, Tumbaru sang before them. As a result, both
Lakshmi and Nãrãyan were pleased and rewarded him with their
clothes and ornaments. Seeing this, Nãradji became jealous of
Tumbaru, and thought, ‘I shall also learn to sing like Tumbaru and
please God.’

5

“Then, Nãradji learned the art of singing and sang before God.
But God commented, ‘You do not know how to sing like Tumbaru.’
Thereafter, Nãradji performed austerities to please Shiv and received
his blessings to master the art of singing. However, when he sang
before God again, God was still not pleased. In this way, Nãradji
continued for seven manvantars. Despite this, God would not be
pleased with his singing.

6

“Finally, Nãradji learned to sing from Tumbaru himself and
then sang before Shri Krishna Bhagwãn in Dwãrikã. Only then was
Shri Krishna Bhagwãn pleased, and only then did he reward Nãradji
with his own clothes and ornaments. Thereafter, Nãradji abandoned
his jealousy towards Tumbaru.

7

“Thus, if one is to harbour jealousy, one should imbibe the
virtues of the person towards whom one is jealous, and should also
abandon one’s own faults. If this cannot be done, then a devotee of
God should at least totally abandon any form of jealousy that would
result in harming another devotee of God.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-4 || 4 ||

The Vachanãmrut

5

Gadhadã I-5
Persistence in Meditation
1

On Mãgshar sudi 8, Samvat 1876 [25 November 1819], Shriji
Mahãrãj was sitting in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was
dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, an assembly of
paramhansas as well as devotees from various places had gathered
before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “One should meditate on Shri
Krishna Bhagwãn together with Rãdhikã. If during that meditation
one cannot behold the form within one’s heart, one should not lose
faith and stop the meditation. Those who persist in this way will
earn the immense grace of God. Moreover, God will be bound by
their bhakti.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-5 || 5 ||

Gadhadã I-6
One with Wisdom and One without Wisdom
1

On Mãgshar sudi 9, Samvat 1876 [26 November 1819], Shriji
Mahãrãj was sitting in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was
dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, an assembly of munis
as well as devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “In this Satsang fellowship, a
person who is wise increasingly finds flaws within himself and
perceives virtues in God and His devotees. Moreover, when God and
His Sant utter harsh words of advice for his own benefit, he accepts
them as beneficial and is not hurt by them. Such a person steadily
attains greatness in Satsang.

3

“Conversely, as a person who lacks wisdom practises satsang
and listens to discourses in Satsang, he continually perceives virtues
within himself. Moreover, when God and His Sant highlight his
flaws and advise him, he misinterprets such advice due to his
arrogance. On the contrary, he perceives flaws in God and His Sant.
Such a person steadily declines and loses his reputation in Satsang.
Therefore, if a person renounces the vanity of his own virtues,
becomes brave, and keeps faith in God and His Sant, then his
ignorance is eradicated and he attains greatness in Satsang.”
The Vachanãmrut

6

|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-6 || 6 ||

Gadhadã I-7
Anvay-Vyatirek
1

On Mãgshar sudi 10, Samvat 1876 [26 November 1819], Shriji
Mahãrãj was sitting in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was
dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, an assembly of
sãdhus as well as devotees from various places had gathered before
Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “No one is able to understand
the philosophical principles found in the scriptures; in fact, all are
confused by them. Therefore, please listen as I explain those
principles precisely as they are.

3

“Behaving as if united with the three bodies of sthul, sukshma
and kãran is the anvay form of the jiva. The jiva as distinct from
these three bodies and characterised by eternal existence is its
vyatirek form.

4

“Ishwar when together with its three bodies of virãt, sutrãtmã
and avyãkrut is its anvay form. Ishwar as distinct from those three
bodies, and characterised by eternal existence, is its vyatirek form.

5

“When Aksharbrahma pervades mãyã and the entities evolved
from mãyã – the countless millions of brahmãnds – it is said to be in
its anvay form. When it is distinct from everything and has the
attributes of eternal existence, consciousness and bliss, that is said to
be its vyatirek form.

6

“When Shri Krishna Bhagwãn is the antaryãmi of and the
controller of Aksharbrahma, the ishwars, the jivas, mãyã and the
entities evolved from mãyã – the brahmãnds – that is said to be the
anvay form of God. When He is distinct from all and resides amidst
the light of Brahma in His abode, Golok, that is said to be the
vyatirek form of God.

7

“These five entities – Parabrahma, Aksharbrahma, mãyã, the
ishwars and the jivas – are eternal.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-7 || 7 ||

The Vachanãmrut

7

Gadhadã I-8
Engaging the Indriyas
in the Service of God and His Sant
1

On Mãgshar sudi 11, Samvat 1876 [27 November 1819], Shriji
Mahãrãj was sitting in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was
dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, an assembly of
sãdhus as well as devotees from various places had gathered before
Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “If the vruttis of the indriyas
are engaged in the service of Shri Krishna Bhagwãn and His Bhakta,
then the antahkaran is purified and the sins that have been attached
to the jiva since time immemorial are destroyed. On the other hand,
if the vruttis of the indriyas are directed towards women and other
vishays, then one’s antahkaran becomes polluted and one falls from
the path of liberation.

3

“Therefore, one should indulge in the vishays only as prescribed
in the scriptures; but one should never indulge in them by
transgressing the regulations that are described in the scriptures.
Also, one should keep association with the Sant and should shun bad
company. In this manner, when a person shuns bad company and
maintains association with the Sant, the sense of I-ness that he
harbours towards his body and the sense of my-ness that he harbours
towards his bodily relations are eradicated.
He also develops
profound love for God and vairãgya towards everything except God.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-8 || 8 ||

Gadhadã I-9
Desiring Nothing Except God
1

On Mãgshar sudi 12, Samvat 1876 [28 November 1819], Shriji
Mahãrãj was sitting in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was
dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, an assembly of munis
as well as devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Suppose a person has developed
a conviction of the manifest form of Shri Krishna Bhagwãn, offers
bhakti to Him and does His darshan. But, despite this, he still does
not consider himself fulfilled, and instead, feels a deficiency within
The Vachanãmrut

8

his antahkaran; that is, ‘As long as I have not seen the radiant form
of this very same God in Golok, Vaikunth and the other abodes, I
have not attained ultimate liberation.’ Even talks about God should
not be heard from a person with such ignorance.
3

“Conversely, if a person has firm faith in the manifest form of
God and believes himself to be fulfilled merely by His darshan, and
desires nothing else, then God Himself forcefully shows him His
divine powers and forms in His abodes.

4

“Therefore, one with singular faith in God should desire nothing
except the manifest form of God.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-9 || 9 ||

Gadhadã I-10
The Ungrateful Sevakrãm
1

On Mãgshar sudi 13, Samvat 1876 [29 November 1819], Shriji
Mahãrãj was sitting in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was
dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, an assembly of
paramhansas as well as devotees from various places had gathered
before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Once, when I was travelling
from Venkatãdri to Setubandh Rãmeshwar, I encountered a sãdhu by
the name of Sevakrãm. He had studied the Shrimad Bhãgwat and
the other Purãns. But it so happened that during his journey, he fell
ill. He had a thousand rupees worth of gold coins with him, but since
he had no one to nurse him, he began to cry. I consoled him, saying,
‘Do not worry about anything; I shall serve you.’

3

“On the outskirts of the village was a banana grove which had a
banyan tree within which a thousand ghosts lived. Because that
sãdhu had become extremely ill and was unable to walk any further,
I felt extreme pity for him. I prepared a bed of banana leaves oneand-a-half feet high under that banyan tree. As the sãdhu was
suffering from dysentery and was passing blood, I would wash him
and attend to him.

4

“The sãdhu would give Me enough of his money to buy sugar,
sãkar, ghee and grains for himself. I would bring the ingredients,
cook them, and then feed him. As for Myself, I would go to the
village for My meals. On some days, when I did not receive any food
The Vachanãmrut

9

from the village, I had to fast. Despite this, that sãdhu never once
said to Me, ‘I have enough money. Cook for both of us so that You
may dine with me.’
5

“After serving the sãdhu for two months in this way, he began to
recover. Thereafter, as we walked towards Setubandh Rãmeshwar,
he made Me carry his belongings weighing about 20 kgs, whereas he
would walk with only a rosary in his hand. By then, he was healthy
and capable of digesting half a kilogram of ghee, yet he would make
Me carry his load while he walked empty-handed. In actual fact, My
nature was such that I would not keep even a handkerchief with Me.
But respecting him as a sãdhu, I walked carrying his belongings
weighing 20 kgs.

6

“Although I served that sãdhu and helped him recover, he did
not offer Me even a single paisa worth of food. Therefore, realising
him to be ungrateful, I abandoned his company. In this way, a
person who does not appreciate favours done by others should be
known as an ungrateful person.

7

“In addition, if a person has committed a sin but has also
performed the prescribed atonement for it as laid down in the
scriptures, then whoever still considers him a sinner should himself
be known as a sinner just like an ungrateful person.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-10 || 10 ||

Gadhadã I-11
‘Vãsanã’; An Ekãntik Bhakta
1

On Mãgshar sudi 14, Samvat 1876 [30 November 1819], Shriji
Mahãrãj was sitting in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was
dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, an assembly of munis
as well as devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Brahmãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, what is the
nature of ‘vãsanã’?”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “A desire within the antahkaran to
enjoy vishays that have been previously seen, heard or indulged in is
called ‘vãsanã’. Moreover, a desire within the antahkaran to enjoy
those vishays that have not been previously indulged in is also called
‘vãsanã’.”
The Vachanãmrut

10

4

Thereafter Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, who can be
called an ekãntik bhakta of God?”

5

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “A person who has no ‘vãsanã’ except
that of God and who offers bhakti to God realising himself to be
brahmarup is called an ekãntik bhakta.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-11 || 11 ||

Gadhadã I-12
The Attributes of the Elements; Creation
1

On Mãgshar sudi Punam, Samvat 1876 [1 December 1819],
Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.
He was dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, an assembly
of sãdhus as well as devotees from various places had gathered before
Him.

2

Shriji Mahãrãj then said, “When one understands the nature of
the causes of the entire creation, specifically Purush, Prakruti, kãl,
the 24 elements2 including mahattattva, etc., then one is released
from the bondage of one’s inherent avidyã and the entities evolved
from it, the 24 elements.”

3

Thereupon Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, how can their
nature be known?”

4

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “Their nature can be realised by knowing
their attributes. I shall now describe those attributes.

5

“Purush is the controller of Prakruti and is also distinct from
her. He is indivisible, without a beginning, without an end, selfluminous, omniscient, satya, kshetragna and the cause of the
activities of all objects that possess a form. He also has a divine
body.

6

“Prakruti is composed of the three gunas. She is both jad and
chaitanya, eternal, nirvishesh, the kshetra of all jivas and all
elements including mahattattva, and also the divine power of God.

7

“That which disturbs mãyã – which is nirvishesh and whose
gunas are normally in a state of equilibrium – is known as kãl.

8

“Now I shall describe the attributes of mahattattva and the
other elements, so please listen.
The Vachanãmrut

11

9

“Chitt and mahattattva should not be regarded as being
different. The entire world inherently resides in a subtle form within
mahattattva, which itself is unchanging, luminous, pure, passive
and full of pure sattvagun.

10

“Now I shall describe the attributes of ahamkãr. Ahamkãr is
composed of the three gunas, and is the cause of the evolution of all of
the bhuts, indriyas, antahkarans, their presiding deities, and the
prãns. It is passive, dense, and totally ignorant.

11

“I shall now describe the attributes of the man. The man is the
site where all desires for women and other objects are generated. It
is subject to fluctuating thoughts and is the governor of all of the
indriyas.

12

“Now I shall describe the attributes of buddhi. It possesses the
knowledge of all objects. The specific knowledge which all of the
indriyas possess is also due to the buddhi. Its inherent features are
doubts, conviction, sleep and memory.

13

“The attribute of the ten indriyas – the ears, the skin, the eyes,
the tongue, the nose, the voice, the hands, the feet, the anus, and the
genitals – is to engage themselves in their respective vishays.

14

“Now I shall describe the attributes of the five tanmãtrãs. The
attributes of sound are that it is the indicator of all objects, and the
cause of all social interactions. Sound also reveals the nature and
class of the speaker. It dwells within ãkãsh and is also the tanmãtrã
of ãkãsh. It is perceived by the ears. These are the attributes of
sound.

15

“I shall now describe the attributes of touch. It is the tanmãtrã
of vãyu. Softness, hardness, coldness, hotness and perception by the
skin are the attributes of touch.

16

“Now I shall describe the attributes of sight. It reveals the
forms of all objects. It resides subordinately in all objects, and
changes as objects change. It is the tanmãtrã of tej and is perceived
by the eyes.

17

“Now I shall describe the attributes of taste. Sweetness,
pungency, distastefulness, bitterness, sourness and saltiness are its
attributes. It is the tanmãtrã of jal and is perceived by the tongue.

The Vachanãmrut

12

18

“I shall now describe the attributes of smell. Fragrance and
stench are its attributes. It is the tanmãtrã of pruthvi and is
perceived by the nose.

19

“Now I shall describe the attributes of pruthvi. It supports all
jivas and, in the form of a celestial body, is their place of residence.
It separates the other four bhuts, i.e. ãkãsh, etc., and it gives a
physical form to all life forms. These are the attributes of pruthvi.

20

“I shall now describe the attributes of jal. It binds pruthvi and
other substances, and it also softens and moistens all objects. It
satisfies and sustains all life forms. Quenching thirst, subduing heat
and abundance are also the attributes of jal.

21

“Now I shall describe the attributes of tej. Luminance, causing
the digestion of food, absorbing liquids, eliminating cold, drying,
creating hunger and thirst, as well as burning wood, ghee and other
sacrificial offerings are the attributes of tej.

22

“I shall now describe the attributes of vãyu. Vãyu causes trees
to shake, and it gathers leaves and other objects. It also carries the
panchvishays, i.e., sights, sounds, smells, tastes and touch, to their
respective indriyas, i.e. eyes, ears, etc. It is the vital force of all of the
indriyas.

23

“Finally, I shall describe the attributes of ãkãsh. It provides
space for all jivas, and is the cause of the internal and external
activities of their bodies. It is also where the prãns, indriyas and
antahkarans reside. These are the attributes of ãkãsh.

24

“In this manner, by knowing the attributes of the 24 elements2,
Prakruti, Purush and kãl, one is freed from ignorance.

25

“Moreover, one should know the process of creation of all of
these, which I shall now describe.

26

“While residing in His abode, Shri Krishna Bhagwãn
impregnates the womb of mãyã through Akshar-Purush, through
whom countless millions of Pradhãns and Purushes are produced.
What are those Pradhãn-Purush pairs like? Well, they are the cause
of the creation of countless millions of brahmãnds. Of these, I shall
now tell you about one Pradhãn-Purush pair – the cause of the
creation of one brahmãnd.

27

“Firstly, Purushottam Shri Krishna Bhagwãn, in the form of
Purush, impregnated the womb of Pradhãn. From that Pradhãn,
The Vachanãmrut

13

mahattattva evolved. From mahattattva, the three types of ahamkãr
evolved. Of these, from sãttvik-ahamkãr, the man and the presiding
deities of the indriyas evolved; from rãjas-ahamkãr, the ten indriyas,
the buddhi and the prãns evolved; and from tãmas-ahamkãr, the five
bhuts and the five tanmãtrãs evolved. In this way, all of those
elements were produced.
28

“Then, inspired by God’s will, each element, with its own
constituents, helped create the bodies of the ishwars and the jivas. A
particular ishwar’s bodies are known as virãt, sutrãtmã and
avyãkrut; and a particular jiva’s bodies are known as sthul, sukshma
and kãran.

29

“The body of the ishwar called Virãt has a lifespan of two
parãrdhs. Fourteen manvantars elapse during one of Virãt-Purush’s
days. His night is of the same duration as the day. During his day,
the lower ten realms of the brahmãnd remain in existence, and after
his night falls, they are destroyed. This is called nimitta-pralay.
When the two parãrdhs of Virãt-Purush have elapsed, the body of
Virãt is destroyed along with Satyalok and the other realms. At that
time, Pradhãn-Prakruti, Purush, and the 24 elements2 including
mahattattva are absorbed back into mahãmãyã. This is called
prãkrut-pralay. When that mahãmãyã is absorbed by the divine
light of Aksharbrahma – like the night merges into the day – it is
called ãtyantik-pralay. Also, the day-to-day death of the bodies of
individual deities, demons, humans and others is called nitya-pralay.

30

“In this manner, by knowing the process of the creation,
sustenance and dissolution of the various realms, one develops
vairãgya towards the world and bhakti towards God. In addition,
when all of those brahmãnds are destroyed, all other jivas lie
dormant within mãyã, whereas the devotees of God attain the abode
of God.”

31

Again, Muktãnand Swãmi inquired, “What is the abode of God
like?”

32

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “The abode of God is without a beginning
and without an end; it is divine, infinite and indivisible; and it is
characterised by eternal existence, consciousness and bliss. I shall
describe it using an analogy. Imagine that this whole world, with all
of its mountains, trees, humans, animals and all other forms, is
made of glass. Also imagine that all of the stars in the sky are as
bright as the sun. Then, just as this glass world would glow with
The Vachanãmrut

14

extreme beauty amidst this radiance, the abode of God is similarly
beautiful. Devotees of God see this in samãdhi and attain that
luminous abode after death.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-12 || 12 ||

Gadhadã I-13
Planting the Branch of a Banyan or
Pipal Tree Elsewhere
1

On the night of Mãgshar vadi 1, Samvat 1876 [2 December
1819], Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot placed on
the platform beneath the neem tree near the mandir of Shri
Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was
wearing a red survãl and a red dagli. He had tied a golden shelu
around His head, and another golden shelu was tied around His
waist. Pearl necklaces hung around His neck, and tassels of pearls
were also dangling from His pãgh. At that time, an assembly of
munis as well as devotees from various places had gathered before
Him.

2

Thereupon Nityãnand Swãmi asked Shriji Mahãrãj, “Is there
only one jiva within each body, or are there many? If You say there
is only one, then when the branches of banyan, pipal or other trees
are cut and planted elsewhere, exactly the same type of tree grows
there as well. Has that one jiva been dissected into two, or has
another jiva entered the new tree? If You say that it is the same jiva,
then how has the jiva, which is whole and indivisible, been cut?”

3

Hearing this, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Here, I shall answer the
question. Purush and Prakruti are the instruments of Shri Krishna
Bhagwãn.
He is the cause of the creation, sustenance, and
dissolution of this cosmos. Through His two instruments of Purush
and Prakruti, He assumed the form of Virãt. Then, during the first
Brãhma-kalp, from his body in the form of Virãt, God gave all beings
from Brahmã to the smallest blade of grass their respective bodies.
Thereafter, during the Pãdma-kalp, God, through the form of
Brahmã, gave Marichi and others their respective bodies. Then
through Kashyap and Daksha, He gave the deities, demons, humans,
animals, and all of the mobile and immobile life forms their bodies.
That Shri Krishna Bhagwãn, along with His instruments in the
The Vachanãmrut

15

form of Purush and Prakruti, resides as the antaryãmi in all jivas
and grants each jiva a body according to its past karmas.
4

“That jiva, in its past lives, has performed many karmas – some
with sattvagun predominating, some with rajogun predominating
and some with tamogun predominating. As a consequence of those
karmas, God grants that jiva a body of the udbhij category, or a body
of the jarãyuj category, or a body of the svedaj category, or a body of
the andaj category. God also grants it the fruits of its karmas in the
form of happiness and misery.

5

In addition, God makes the body of that jiva give birth to
another body – again, according to its own karmas. Just as God
created the various life forms from the bodies of Kashyap and the
other prajãpatis, similarly, that same God, while residing in all jivas
as antaryãmi, creates other bodies from one body by methods
appropriate to that particular body. However, the jiva, through
which other bodies are created, does not itself multiply into many
forms. So, in reality, God grants birth to a jiva, through an
appropriate body of another jiva, according to the relation of the
karmas between the two jivas.”
| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-13 || 13 ||

Gadhadã I-14
“Ante Yã Matihi Sã Gatihi”
1

On Mãgshar vadi 2, Samvat 1876 [2 December 1819], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting facing south on a large,
decorated cot under the neem tree in front of the mandir of Shri
Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He had tied
a white pãgh around His head. He was also wearing a white khes
and had covered Himself with a white cotton cloth. Also, tassels of
yellow flowers decorated His pãgh. Bunches of yellow flowers had
been placed above both of His ears, with roses decorating those
bunches. Garlands of yellow flowers adorned His neck as well. With
His right hand, He was playing with a white sevanti flower. At that
time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees from various places
had gathered before Him.

2

Shriji Mahãrãj then asked the munis, “Suppose there are two
devotees of God. One has renounced worldly life, and although he
The Vachanãmrut

16

does not have intense vairãgya, he does physically observe the
religious vows thoroughly. Nevertheless, he still harbours a slight
desire for worldly life in his mind, but he overcomes this by a thought
process. He also has firm faith in God. Such is the renunciant. On
the other hand, there is another devotee, a householder, who also has
firm faith in God. Even though he has remained a householder by
God’s command, he is disinterested in worldly life. He has the same
intensity of worldly desires as the renunciant. Of these two devotees
of God, who is better?”
3

Muktãnand Swãmi replied, “The renunciant devotee is better.”

4

Shriji Mahãrãj countered, “The renunciant has renounced of his
own accord, out of frustration; so how can he be better? The
householder, on the other hand, has stayed at home because of God’s
command; so how can he be inferior?”

5

Muktãnand Swãmi attempted to answer Shriji Mahãrãj’s
question in many ways but was unable to do so satisfactorily. Thus,
he said, “Mahãrãj, please answer the question Yourself.”

6

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “If a renunciant who is weakminded receives rich foods to eat, then desires for worldly life will be
revived within his heart. Or, if he encounters many hardships,
again, desires for worldly life will be revived. Compared to such a
renunciant, a householder is much better, because whenever a
householder encounters times of extreme hardship or even times of
great pleasure, he is always cautious lest he becomes attached to
these pleasures. With this awareness, he remains disinterested in
worldly life. Therefore, a true renunciant is one who has no desires
for worldly life having once renounced it.

7

“Keep in mind, though, that a householder is much better than a
renunciant with worldly desires, provided he observes the dharma
prescribed for householders. The householders’ dharma, however, is
extremely difficult to observe, because countless occasions of good and
bad times are encountered. Despite this, a true householder’s mind
does not waver from serving the Sant or from observing his dharma.
He also realises, ‘The profound association of the Sant that I have
attained is like a magnificent chintãmani and a kalpavruksh. My
wealth, property, sons and daughters are all merely like a dream,
whereas the profound association of the Sant that I have attained is
the only true benefit of life.’ Moreover, he remains undeterred amidst
any type of adversity that may come his way. Such a householder is
The Vachanãmrut

17

by far the better of the two. Therefore, of all things, becoming a
devotee of God is very difficult. Moreover, to attain the association of
the Bhakta of God is very rare, indeed.”
8

Having spoken in this way, Shriji Mahãrãj then arranged for
the singing of devotional songs written by Muktãnand Swãmi
describing the glory of God and His Sant.

9

Thereafter Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “The Shrutis state, ‘•ãÃ

ÿÊ ◊ÁÃ— ‚Ê ªÁÃ—– ’i. They claim that if one’s mind is fixed on God at

the time of death, one will attain a favourable fate after death;
otherwise, one will not. This seems to be the interpretation of that
Vedic verse. If this is so, what is the significance of the bhakti one
has performed throughout one’s life?”
10

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “A person who has been graced with
the attainment of the manifest form of God never falls from the path
of liberation, regardless of whether he remembers God at the time of
death. God invariably protects him.

11

“Conversely, a person who has turned away from God does not
attain liberation even if he dies normally, while being conscious.
Instead, he is consigned to Yampuri after death. Many sinful
butchers die while still fully conscious. But if a devotee of God suffers
an untimely death, does that mean he will not attain liberation?
Moreover, will that sinner attain liberation?
Certainly not.
Therefore, that Vedic verse should be interpreted as follows: ‘The
outcome at the time of death is determined by the present state of the
mind.’ Thus, a devotee who realises in his mind, ‘My liberation is
guaranteed,’ will, as a result, certainly attain liberation after death.
In comparison, a person who has not been graced with the
attainment of the Sant or the form of God will feel in his mind, ‘I am
ignorant, and I will not attain liberation.’ As a result, his state of
mind will determine his fate after death.

12

“Furthermore, a person who is a servant of God has nothing left
to do. In fact, other jivas attain liberation by his darshan, so what is
i Ante yã matihi sã gatihi

Whatever one’s mental state is like at the time of one’s death, such will be the
state of one’s jiva after one’s death.
Hiranyakeshiyashãkhã Shruti

The Vachanãmrut

18

surprising about he himself attaining liberation? But to cultivate
servitude towards God is very difficult indeed. Why? Because a
servant of God has the following characteristics: He realises the
physical body is asatya, and his own ãtmã is satya. He harbours no
desires to indulge in the objects that are intended for his Master.
Also, he never behaves contrary to the wishes of his Master. Such a
person is called a true servant of God; whereas a servant of God who
behaves as the body is a pseudo-devotee.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-14 || 14 ||

Gadhadã I-15
Not Becoming Discouraged in Meditation
1

On Mãgshar vadi 3, Samvat 1876 [4 December 1819], Shriji
Mahãrãj was sitting in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was
dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, an assembly of all of
the sãdhus as well as devotees from various places had gathered
before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “A person whose heart is filled
with bhakti towards God feels, ‘I want to act only according to God’s
and His Sant’s commands.’ Such is the spirit within his heart.
Moreover, he never – even by mistake – utters, ‘I will only be able to
follow certain commands, but not others.’

3

“Furthermore, such a person remains determined to behold
God’s form in his heart. If, while meditating on that form, it cannot
be beheld, he does not lose courage. Instead, he constantly maintains
renewed shraddhã. While trying to behold that form, disturbing
thoughts may arise, and, despite his efforts, they may not be
suppressed. In this situation, by understanding the immense glory of
God and believing himself to be completely fulfilled, such a person
persists in overcoming those disturbing thoughts and beholding God’s
form within his heart. Even if this process takes 10 years, 20 years,
25 years, or even 100 years, he still does not become discouraged; and
never does he abandon his attempts at beholding God’s form. After
all, Shri Krishna Bhagwãn has mentioned in the Gitã:

The Vachanãmrut

19

•Ÿ∑§¡ã◊‚¢Á‚hSÃÃÙ ÿÊÁÃ ¬⁄Ê¢ ªÁÃ◊˜H i
Therefore, one who continues to behold God in this manner is called
an ekãntik bhakta.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-15 || 15 ||

Gadhadã I-16
Wisdom
1

On Mãgshar vadi 4, Samvat 1876 [5 December 1819], Shriji
Mahãrãj was sitting in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was
dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, an assembly of
sãdhus as well as devotees from various places had gathered before
Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “A wise devotee of God who can
discern between sat and asat identifies the flaws within himself and
thoughtfully eradicates them. He also rejects any apparent flaws he
perceives in the Sant or a satsangi and imbibes only their virtues.
Moreover, he never perceives any faults whatsoever in God. In
addition, he accepts whatever words of advice God and the Sant offer
as the highest truth but does not doubt their words in any way.
Thus, when the Sant tells him, ‘You are distinct from the mind,
body, indriyas and prãns; you are satya; you are the knower of the
body, indriyas and prãns, which are all asatya’ – he accepts this to be
the truth. He then behaves as the ãtmã – distinct from them all –
but never follows the instincts of his own mind.

3

“Furthermore, such a person identifies those objects and evil
company that may cause bondage or raise deficiencies in his ekãntik
dharma and shuns them; but he does not become bound by them.
Also,
he
imbibes
positive
thoughts
and
avoids
negative thoughts. One who behaves in this manner should be
known to possess wisdom.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-16 || 16 ||
i Aneka-janma-sansiddhas-tato yãti parãm gatim||

[A yogi] who… has become realised after many lives attains the highest state of
enlightenment.
Bhagwad Gitã: 6.45

The Vachanãmrut

20

Gadhadã I-17
Negative Influence in Satsang;
Not Uttering Discouraging Words
1

On Mãgshar vadi 5, Samvat 1876 [6 December 1819], Shriji
Mahãrãj was sitting in a west-facing room of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr
in Gadhadã. He was wearing a white khes and had covered Himself
with a white cotton cloth. He had also tied a white pãgh around His
head, and a tassel of yellow flowers was inserted into that pãgh.
Wearing a garland of yellow flowers, Mahãrãj was seated in this
manner in a very cheerful mood while a passage from the Shrimad
Bhãgwat was being read.

2

At that time, Shriji Mahãrãj called for Muktãnand Swãmi,
Gopãlãnand Swãmi and some other sãdhus. Addressing them, He
said, “In our Satsang fellowship, a small element of negative
influence remains, which I wish to eliminate today. I want to
conduct this matter in such a manner that it encompasses all
satsangis, paramhansas, sãnkhya-yogis and karma-yogis.

3

“Now, what is this negative influence in Satsang? Well, those
who preach in Satsang speak discouragingly. That is the negative
influence in Satsang. What do they say? They say, ‘Who can follow
God’s commands thoroughly? Who can possibly observe the religious
vows perfectly? No one. Therefore, we should observe only as much
as we possibly can. After all, God is the redeemer of even the wicked,
and so He will grant liberation to us as well.’

4

“Moreover, they say, ‘Attempting to behold God’s form in the
heart is not possible by one’s own efforts. It is only beheld by those
whom God helps out of compassion.’ With such complacent words,
they discourage others from practising dharma, gnãn, vairãgya,
bhakti, and other spiritual endeavours for pleasing God.

5

“Therefore, from this day onwards, no one in our Satsang
fellowship should utter such discouraging words. Instead, always
speak courageously. Those who do speak such words should be
known as impotents. In fact, on days when one speaks such
discouraging words, one should observe a fast.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-17 || 17 ||

The Vachanãmrut

21

Gadhadã I-18
Denouncing the Vishays; A Haveli
1

Three hours before sunrise on Mãgshar vadi 6, Samvat 1876 [7
December 1819], Swãmi Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a
large, decorated cot in the courtyard in front of the veranda outside
the west-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He
was dressed entirely in white clothes.

2

After summoning the paramhansas and satsangis, Shriji
Mahãrãj sat engrossed in thought for quite some time. Then He
said, “I wish to tell all of you something, so please listen.” He then
said, “In My mind I feel that I should not talk about this matter, but
understanding all of you to be Mine, I shall tell you anyway. The
matter is such that only one who understands it and acts exactly
according to it will become a mukta. Otherwise, even by listening to,
or studying and understanding the meanings of the four Vedas, six
Shãstras, eighteen Purãns, and the Mahãbhãrat and other Itihãs
scriptures, one cannot become a mukta. I shall now talk about that
matter, so please listen.

3

“Regardless of the tempting objects which may appear before Me,
if there is no desire for them in My mind, I am not worried. Besides,
My nature is such that even if the slightest desire for an object arises
within, I feel at ease only after shunning it.

4

“For this reason, I thought about what actually causes
disturbances within the hearts of God’s devotees. I considered the
man, buddhi, chitt and ahamkãr as possible causes. However, the
antahkaran is not the cause of these disturbances. The only fault of
the antahkaran is the complacency that it harbours – due to either
the power of its faith in God or the strength derived from knowledge
of the ãtmã. Due to this complacency, it feels, ‘I have found God, and
so I have nothing left to do.’

5

“Actually, the greater fault lies with the five gnãn-indriyas,
which I shall now elaborate in detail. Of the many varieties of foods
that a person eats, each has differing tastes and differing intrinsic
qualities. When he eats that food, the intrinsic qualities of the food
pervade and affect the antahkaran as well as the entire body. For
example, if someone drinks bhang, then even if he is a devotee of God,
he loses awareness of his religious vows and the worship of God due
to the stimulation caused by that bhang. Similarly, the intrinsic
The Vachanãmrut

22

qualities of the countless types of food are, like bhang, of a countless
variety. So much so, that they seem endless.
6

“In the same way, a person also hears a countless variety of
sounds with his ears. Those sounds also have a countless variety of
intrinsic qualities. Consequently, the qualities of whatever sounds he
listens to pervade and affect his antahkaran. For example, there
may be an armed and violent person, an adulterous person, a
prostitute, or a person who transgresses the rules of the Vedas and
society. Listening to the talks of such vicious persons is like
drinking bhang or alcohol; i.e., such talks pollute the antahkaran of
the listener and make him forget the worship of God as well as his
religious vows.

7

“Similarly, there are countless varieties of touch sensations.
They too have countless varieties of intrinsic qualities. The touch of
a sinful person also has an effect like that of bhang and alcohol.
Therefore, even if a devotee were to touch such a person, that devotee
would lose all of his virtues.

8

“There are also countless varieties of things to see. They too
have countless varieties of intrinsic qualities. If one looks at an
immoral person, the effect is just as detrimental as drinking bhang
or alcohol, i.e., looking at an immoral person certainly does pollute
one’s mind and cause harm.

9

“In the same way, there are countless varieties of smells, with
countless varieties of intrinsic qualities. If one smells the fragrance
of a flower or some sandalwood paste from the hands of a sinful
person, it pollutes one’s mind in the same way as drinking bhang.

10

“Conversely, just as one’s mind is polluted by association with
the immoral, association with God or His Sant purifies one’s mind.
Even if one’s mind is polluted, it is purified by listening to the words
of God and His Sant. The mind is similarly purified by their touch.
If, however, due to the constraints of one’s religious vows, one is
unable to touch such a great Sant, then merely touching the dust of
his feet to one’s head makes one pure. Likewise, one is purified by
the darshan of the great Sant; but of course one should do darshan
while respecting one’s religious vows. One is also purified by eating
his prasãd. Here also, prasãd should be taken in accordance with
the niyams of one’s caste and ãshram as set by God. If one is unable
to take prasãd, one should offer sãkar and take that as prasãd. In
The Vachanãmrut

23

the same manner, smelling the fragrance of the flowers and
sandalwood paste offered to the great Sant also purifies the mind.
11

“On the other hand, if one indulges in the panchvishays
thoughtlessly, without distinguishing good from bad, then even if one
is as great as Nãrad and the Sanakãdik, one’s mind will surely
become polluted. What is so surprising, then, about the mind of one
who believes oneself to be the body becoming polluted? Therefore, if
one gives liberty to the five indriyas without applying the
discrimination of what is suitable or unsuitable, one’s antahkaran
will become polluted. On the other hand, if one indulges only in pure
vishays through the five indriyas, then one’s antahkaran becomes
pure. If the antahkaran becomes pure, one will be able to constantly
remember God.

12

“However, if the objects of indulgence of just one of the five
indriyas is impure, the antahkaran will also become impure.
Therefore, the sole cause of any disturbance experienced by a devotee
of God during worship is the vishays of the five indriyas, not the
antahkaran.

13

“Another factor that determines the nature of a person’s
antahkaran is the type of company he keeps. If he sits in a gathering
of materialistic people in a lavish seven-storey haveli decorated with
beautiful mirrors and comfortable seats, and if those materialistic
people are seated wearing various types of jewellery and fine clothes,
and are exchanging alcohol amongst themselves, with prostitutes
performing vulgar dances to the accompaniment of various musical
instruments – then the person’s antahkaran will unquestionably be
adversely affected. On the other hand, if a person sits in an assembly
where a paramhansa is seated on a torn mattress in a grass hut and
discourses of God, dharma, gnãn, vairãgya and bhakti are in
progress – then the person’s antahkaran will surely be favourably
affected.

14

“Therefore, if one thoughtfully examines the influence of good
company and evil company on the antahkaran, their effects can be
realised. A fool, however, cannot realise this. Indeed, this fact will
not be understood by those who behave irresponsibly like animals. In
comparison, one who has even a little wisdom and has sought at least
some refuge in God will immediately understand. Therefore, all
paramhansas, sãnkhya-yogis and karma-yogis should not associate
with evil people.
The Vachanãmrut

24

15

“Regardless of how evil a person may be before joining the
Satsang fellowship, he should be accepted into Satsang after he takes
the appropriate vows. If after joining Satsang, however, that person
retains his evil nature, he should be removed from Satsang. If he or
she is not removed, then much harm will result. For example, if a
person’s finger is bitten by a snake, or if it develops gangrene, and if
the affected part is immediately removed, then the rest of the body
remains healthy. But if it is not removed, much harm results.
Similarly, if a person is recognised as evil, you should immediately
shun him.

16

“In conclusion, be wise enough to accept these words of Mine. If
you do so, I shall consider it to be equivalent to you having served Me
in every way. I will also bless all of you and be extremely pleased
with you. Why? Because thereby you will have justified My efforts.
Moreover, all of us will dwell together in the abode of God. However,
if you do not behave in this manner, we will be greatly distanced.
Consequently, you will be reborn as a ghost or a demon, and you will
have to suffer. Of course, the fruits of whatever bhakti you may have
previously offered to God will be rewarded eventually, but only after
much misery. Even then, you will become a mukta and go to the
abode of God only by behaving as I have described.

17

“Furthermore, if anyone attempts to imitate Me, he will
definitely suffer. Why? Because Narnãrãyan resides within My
heart. Moreover, I am eternally liberated. I have not become a
mukta through the preaching of others. I exercise complete control
over My man, buddhi, chitt and ahamkãr. In fact, I seize My
antahkaran just as a lion clutches a goat, whereas others cannot
even see their antahkaran. Therefore, imitating Me, believing that
one can remain pure even amidst alluring pleasures is just not
possible, even for the likes of Nãrad and the Sanakãdik. So what can
be said of others?

18

“Countless have become muktas and countless more will become
so. Amongst them, none have been able to indulge in pleasures of the
senses and yet remain uninfluenced by them; none will be able to do
so in the future; nor is there anyone like that presently. Even one
who has endeavoured for countless millions of years is incapable of
remaining uninfluenced amidst temptations.
Therefore, if you
behave as I have described, you will benefit.”

The Vachanãmrut

25

19

Continuing, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “When I lovingly call someone
near, it is for the benefit of their jiva. When I look at someone
affectionately, or eat the tasty meals they have prepared, or sit on a
decorated cot arranged by them, or accept from them clothes,
ornaments, garlands of flowers and other offerings – it is all for the
good of their jiva, but not for the sake of My personal enjoyment. In
fact, I swear by the name of Rãmãnand Swãmi that I do not accept
those objects for My personal pleasure. Therefore, realising this,
none of you should imitate Me.
“Also, keep the activities of your five indriyas extremely pure. Please
accept this command of Mine without fail. This fact is simple in that
it is comprehensible to all; so all of you will immediately understand
it. Moreover, if you extensively propagate it throughout Satsang, I
shall be very pleased indeed.”

20

Having delivered this discourse, Shriji Mahãrãj bid ‘Jai
Sachchidãnand’ to all and returned to His residence.
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-18 || 18 ||

Gadhadã I-19
The Interdependency of Ãtmã-realisation and
Other Virtues
1

On the evening of Posh sudi 1, Samvat 1876 [17 December
1819], Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in
Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, an
assembly of paramhansas as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “In this Satsang fellowship,
those devotees seeking their own ultimate liberation cannot fulfill
that aim by ãtmã-realisation alone; nor can they fulfill that aim by
lovingly offering the nine types of bhakti alone; nor can they fulfill
that aim by vairãgya alone; nor can they fulfill that aim by
swadharma alone. Thus, all four virtues, i.e., ãtmã-realisation,
bhakti, vairãgya and swadharma. should be perfected since all are
dependent upon each other.

3

“Now please listen as I describe how these four virtues are
interdependent.
The Vachanãmrut

26

4

“One may have the virtue of ãtmã-realisation, but if one does not
have lovei towards God, then one does not attain the favour of God,
which can only be attained by such love. Such favour results in the
attainment of the desirable and great divine power of not being
overpowered by the gunas of mãyã. If, on the other hand, one does
have love for God, but has not attained ãtmã-realisation, then due to
the belief that oneself is the body, that love cannot be perfected. One
may have both the virtue of ãtmã-realisation and love for God, but if
one lacks firm vairãgya, then the desires for worldly vishays will
prevent the perfection of ãtmã-realisation and love for God. Then
again, one may have vairãgya, but if one lacks the virtues of ãtmãrealisation and love for God, one does not experience the profound
bliss associated with the form of God.
Also, one may have
swadharma, but if love for God, ãtmã-realisation and vairãgya are
absent, then one will not be able to transcend Bhurlok, Bhuvarlok
and all of the other realms up to Brahmã’s Satyalok. That is to say,
one will not be able to transcend the brahmãnds and attain God’s
Akshardhãm, which transcends the darkness of mãyã. On the other
hand, one may have the three virtues of ãtmã-realisation, love for
God and vairãgya, but if swadharma is lacking, the other three
cannot be perfected.

5

“In this manner, ãtmã-realisation and the other three virtues
are dependent upon each other. A devotee who has extremely firmly
established these four virtues within himself through the profound
association with God’s Ekãntik Bhakta has completed all spiritual
endeavours.
Only he should be known as an ekãntik bhakta.
Therefore, a devotee having any deficiency in these four virtues
should overcome that deficiency by serving and profoundly
associating with the Ekãntik Bhakta of God.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-19 || 19 ||

Gadhadã I-20
An Ignorant Person; Seeing One’s Own Self
1

On Posh sudi 2, Samvat 1876 [18 December 1819], Shriji
Mahãrãj was seated on a cushion with a cylindrical pillow on the
i Here, ‘love’ should be understood as ‘bhakti’.

The Vachanãmrut

27

veranda outside the east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in
Gadhadã. He had tied a white pãgh around His head, and a tassel of
yellow flowers had been placed in that pãgh. A garland of yellow
flowers had been placed around His neck, and bunches of white and
yellow flowers had been placed upon His ears. He had also covered
Himself with a thick, white cotton cloth and was wearing a blackbordered khes. At that time, scriptural reading had commenced, and
paramhansas as well as devotees from various places had gathered
before Shriji Mahãrãj.
2

Then Swãmi Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj said, “Please listen, I
wish to ask all of you a question.”

3

Hearing this, all of the devotees said with folded hands, “Please
do ask.”

4

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj asked, “Who is the most ignorant of
all ignorant people?”

5

Everyone pondered over the question, but no one was able to
reply. So Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Here, I shall answer Myself.”

6

Hearing this, everyone was pleased and said, “Mahãrãj, only You
will be able to give a precise answer; so please explain.”

7

Shriji Mahãrãj then began, “The jiva, which resides within the
body, observes both the attractive and the unattractive. It witnesses
childhood, youth and old age, as well as a countless number of other
things. However, the observer fails to observe its own self. The jiva
looks at objects externally; but it does not look at its own self.
Therefore, it is the most ignorant of the ignorant.

8

“Furthermore, just as the jiva indulges in a countless variety of
sights with the eyes, it similarly indulges in and knows the pleasures
of the other vishays with the ears, skin, tongue and nose; but it does
not indulge in the bliss of its own self; nor does it know its own
nature. For this reason, it is the most ignorant of the ignorant, the
most senseless of the senseless, the most foolish of fools and the vilest
of the vile.”

9

At that point, Shuk Muni raised a doubt. He asked, “Is it truly
in one’s own hands to see one’s own self? If it is, why does the jiva
remain ignorant?”

10

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “For a person who has attained satsang,
realisation of his jivãtmã does, indeed, lie in his own hands. In fact,
The Vachanãmrut

28

when has he attempted to see his own self and failed to see it?
Having become dependent to and made helpless by mãyã, that jiva
draws within and enters the dream and deep sleep states, but never
does it draw within of its own accord to see its own self. On the other
hand, one who contemplates on the greatness of God and draws
within oneself sees one’s own self as extremely pure and luminous.
In the midst of that luminance, one beholds the form of the manifest
Purushottam Bhagwãn and experiences bliss in the manner of Nãrad
and the Sanakãdik. Therefore, all deficiencies which do remain in a
devotee are due to his own lethargy.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-20 || 20 ||

Gadhadã I-21
One Possessing Ekãntik Dharma;
The Two Forms of Akshar
1

On the evening of Posh sudi 3, Samvat 1876 [19 December
1819], Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting facing east on a large, decorated cot
on the veranda outside the east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s
darbãr in Gadhadã. He was wearing a black-bordered khes and had
covered Himself with a thick, white cotton cloth. He had also tied a
white pãgh around His head. At that time, some sãdhus were
singing devotional songs to the accompaniment of a jhãnjh and
pakhwãj. Many other sãdhus as well as satsangis from various
places had assembled before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj quietened the assembly and said,
“Please listen; I wish to tell you something.” Having said this, He
sat in contemplation with His eyes closed for quite some time.

3

Thereafter, He began, “A devotee who in his mind desires to
intensely please God can do so by the following means: unshakeable
resolve in observing the dharma of one’s caste and ãshram; intensely
firm ãtmã-realisation; dislike for all objects except God; and bhakti
which is devoid of all desires for fruits, and which is accompanied
with an understanding of God’s greatness. It is through these four
spiritual endeavours that God can be extremely pleased. They are
collectively known as ekãntik dharma. At present, there are many
devotees possessing such ekãntik dharma in our Satsang fellowship.

The Vachanãmrut

29

4

“In addition, a devotee of God should contemplate on the form of
God while eating, drinking, bathing, washing, walking and sitting –
in fact, during all activities. He should particularly contemplate on
God and continuously behold His form when there is no mental
disturbance within.
However, when there is some internal
disturbance due to fluctuating thoughts, he should realise his own
self to be distinct from the body, the indriyas, the antahkaran, their
presiding deities and the vishays. Only when those disturbing
thoughts subside should he contemplate on the form of God.

5

“Furthermore, this body should not be believed to be one’s true
self. Nor should one’s bodily relations be regarded as one’s true
relations. This is because the jiva has previously taken birth in each
of the 8.4 million life forms3. In fact, the jiva has taken birth in the
wombs of all females in this world; it has also taken birth numerous
times in the wombs of all of the dogs, cats, monkeys and other types
of life forms in the cycle of 8.4 million life forms. Moreover, of all the
different types of females in this world, which has it not previously
made its wife? All have been its wife at one time or another.
Similarly, assuming numerous female bodies, that jiva has also made
all of the different forms of males its husband. Hence, just as one
does not believe the relations of those previous 8.4 million life forms
to be one’s true relations, and just as one does not believe the bodies
of those 8.4 million life forms to be one’s true body, similarly, one
should not believe this present body to be one’s true self, nor should
one believe the relations of this body to be one’s true relations. Why?
Because just as no relationship remains with bodies from the
previous 8.4 million life forms, similarly the relationship with this
body will not remain either. Therefore, having realised the body, all
possessions and all objects to be asatya; and having realised one’s
own self to be distinct from the body, indriyas and antahkaran; and
while observing one’s own dharma, one should offer bhakti to God
which is devoid of all desires for its fruits. Moreover, in order to
increasingly understand the profound greatness of God day by day,
one should also constantly keep the company of a sãdhu.

6

“A person who does not have this understanding, who identifies
his self with the body, and who has a mundane attitude should be
thought of as an animal – even if he is presently in the Satsang
fellowship. Yet, in this Satsang, even animals attain liberation by
the profound grace of God. What is so surprising, then, about
humans attaining liberation? However, such a person cannot be
The Vachanãmrut

30

called a true ekãntik bhakta of God. Only one possessing the
understanding previously described can be called an ekãntik bhakta.
After such an ekãntik bhakta leaves his body and becomes free of all
influences of mãyã, he attains Akshardhãm via the archimãrg.”
7

Continuing, Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “That Akshar has two
forms. One, which is formless and pure chaitanya, is known as
Chidãkãsh or Brahmamahol. In its other form, that Akshar remains
in the service of Purushottam Nãrãyan. A devotee who has reached
Akshardhãm attains qualities similar to those of Akshar and forever
remains in the service of God.
Furthermore, Shri Krishna
Purushottam Nãrãyan is forever seated in that Akshardhãm. The
countless millions of muktas, who have attained qualities similar to
those of Akshar, reside in that Akshardhãm, and all of them behave
as servants of Purushottam. Purushottam Nãrãyan Himself is the
master of them all and the Lord of the lords of countless millions of
brahmãnds.

8

“Keeping this in mind, all of our satsangis should develop the
following singular conviction: ‘We also wish to join the ranks of the
aksharrup muktas and go to Akshardhãm to forever remain in the
service of God. We have no desire for the temporary and vain worldly
pleasures; nor do we wish to be tempted by them in any way.’
Keeping such a firm conviction, one should offer ekãntik bhakti to
God.

9

“Furthermore, by thoroughly understanding the profound
greatness of God, one should, in this very life, eradicate one’s desires
for women, wealth and all objects other than God. Otherwise, if
desires for objects other than God do remain, then after one dies, if
one encounters enticements along the path to the abode of God, one
will forsake God and be lured by those enticements instead. This
would prove to be a major obstruction. Therefore, one should worship
God after overcoming desires for all objects.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-21 || 21 ||

The Vachanãmrut

31

Gadhadã I-22
Singing without Remembering God Is as Good as
Not Singing at All; The Digit ‘1’i
1

At noon on Posh sudi 4, Samvat 1876 [20 December 1819], Shriji
Mahãrãj was sitting facing east on a large, decorated cot on the
veranda outside the east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in
Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white clothes. A tassel of
flowers had been inserted in His pãgh, and bunches of flowers had
been placed upon both of His ears. He was also wearing a garland of
guldãvadi flowers around His neck. At that time, while some
paramhansas were singing devotional songs, other paramhansas as
well as devotees from various places had gathered before Him in an
assembly.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Please listen; I wish to tell you
something.”

3

Hearing this, the paramhansas stopped singing and prepared
themselves to listen.

4

Shriji Mahãrãj then said, “If one does not remember God while
singing to the accompaniment of a mrudang, sãrangi, sarodã, tãl or
other instruments, then that singing is as good as not having sung at
all. Besides, there are many people in this world who sing and play
instruments without remembering God; but they do not attain peace
of mind. Therefore, whichever activity one performs – whether it be
singing devotional songs, reciting God’s holy name, chanting the
‘Nãrãyan’ dhunya, etc. – one should only perform that activity while
remembering the form of God.

5

“If a person specifically attempts to engage himself in worship,
he may be able to focus his vrutti on God; however, after completing
those acts of worship, if he does not maintain his vrutti on God while
engaged in other activities, then his vrutti will not become steadied
on the form of God even when he attempts to engage in worship
again. Therefore, one should practise maintaining one’s vrutti on the
form of God while walking, eating, drinking – in fact, during all
i The title refers to the importance of the digit ‘1’.

A long row of zeros has no
value, but when a single ‘1’ is placed before the zeros, the value of the composite
figure is exponentially increased with each zero.

The Vachanãmrut

32

activities. If one does this, one’s vrutti becomes steadied on God
when one engages in worship as well. Moreover, when one’s vrutti
begins to remain on God, it remains so even during other work. If
one is complacent, though, one’s vrutti will not remain on God even
when one specifically attempts to engage oneself in worship.
Therefore, a devotee of God should vigilantly practise maintaining his
vrutti on the form of God.”
6

Having said this, Shriji Mahãrãj requested, “Now please sing
devotional songs.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-22 || 22 ||

Gadhadã I-23
Emptying a Pot of Water;
Remaining in an Elevated Spiritual State
1

On Posh sudi 5, Samvat 1876 [21 December 1819], Shriji
Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot on the veranda outside
the east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He had
tied a white feto around His head and was wearing a white angarkhu
and a white survãl. He had also tied a deep orange shelu around His
waist. At that time, paramhansas as well as devotees from various
places had gathered before Him.

2

Out of compassion, Shriji Mahãrãj then began to speak to the
paramhansas, “The Vãsudev Mãhãtmya scripture is extremely dear
to Me because it describes all of the methods of how devotees of God
should worship Him.”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj then continued, “There are two types of devotees
of God: One has a complete conviction of God, yet worships God
identifying himself with the body. The other, however, believes his
own self to be chaitanya, transcending the influences of the three
states – waking, dream and deep sleep, and the three bodies – sthul,
sukshma and kãran. This devotee worships God while beholding
God’s form within his own self. As a result, he sees his own self,
which transcends the three states and the three bodies, as being
extremely full of divine light. Within that light, he sees the form of
God, just as it is in its incarnate form, as being extremely luminous.
Such is the elevated spiritual state of the latter devotee.
The Vachanãmrut

33

4

“As long as one has not attained this elevated spiritual state, one
is subject to obstacles, even if one is a devotee of God. Shivji, for
example, did not behave in such an elevated spiritual state and was
therefore enticed by the beauty of Mohini. Brahmã also did not
behave in such a state and thus became infatuated on seeing
Saraswati. Nãradji also did not behave in such an elevated spiritual
state and consequently harboured a desire to marry. Moreover,
because Indra, Chandra and others were not behaving in such a
state, their reputations were also blemished due to their mistakes.

5

“Furthermore, if a person has not developed this elevated
spiritual state, he will perceive worldly attributes even in God, even if
he himself is a devotee of God. King Parikshit, for example, was not
such a devotee, and so he raised doubts about the divinity of Shri
Krishna Bhagwãn after hearing of the rãs episode. On the other
hand, because Shukji was such an elevated devotee, he had no doubts
whatsoever. Such a devotee firmly realises, ‘If no flaws can affect me
or bind me in any way, how can there possibly be any mãyik flaws in
God, by whose worship I have become like this?’ Such a devotee
firmly realises this.

6

“When such a devotee of God focuses his vrutti on the form of
God, that vrutti is divided into two. Of these, one vrutti focuses on
the form of God, while the other focuses within the worshipper
himself. The vrutti that is fixed on God’s form is applied lovingly,
whereas the vrutti that is fixed on the worshipper himself is full of
contemplation. This latter vrutti negates all other thoughts and
desires – except those of worshipping God – that may arise in the
worshipper. It also negates all of the flaws within the worshipper
himself. In this manner, the vrutti of such a devotee constantly
remains on God.

7

“A person who at times worships God with a concentrated mind
and, at other times, indulges in worldly thoughts does not develop
such an elevated spiritual state. Consider, for example, a pot that is
filled with water and emptied somewhere. If another pot of water is
subsequently emptied at the same place on the following day or the
day after that, a pool of water will not collect there. Why? Because
the water poured on the first day dries up on that very day, and the
water poured on the second day also dries up on that same day. On
the other hand, if a trickle of water were to flow continuously, a large
pool of water would soon be formed. Therefore, while eating,
The Vachanãmrut

34

drinking, walking, engaging in any activity whatsoever – whether it
be pure or impure – in fact, at all times, one should constantly keep
one’s vrutti on God. While maintaining one’s vrutti constantly on
God in this manner, one attains that abiding elevated spiritual
state.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-23 || 23 ||

Gadhadã I-24
The Elevated Spiritual State of Gnãn; ‘Sourness’ in
the Form of the Understanding of God’s Greatness
1

On the evening of Posh sudi 6, Samvat 1876 [22 December
1819], Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot on the
veranda outside the east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in
Gadhadã. He had tied a white feto around His head and was wearing
a white khes. Also, He had donned a warm, red dagli and had
covered Himself with a thick, white cotton cloth. At that time,
paramhansas as well as devotees from various places had gathered
before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said to the paramhansas, “I shall
explain how an elevated spiritual state can be attained by gnãn.
What is that gnãn like? Well, it transcends Prakruti-Purush. When
an elevated spiritual state is attained by this gnãn, Prakruti-Purush
and the entities evolved from them do not come into view. This is
known as gnãn-pralay. One who has attained such an elevated
spiritual state sees only pure chaitanya – within which only the form
of God resides, with no other forms remaining. At times, one cannot
see even the form of God within that divine light; only the light is
seen. At other times, however, both the divine light and the form of
God are seen. This is known as the elevated spiritual state attained
by gnãn. Such an elevated spiritual state is attained by constantly
maintaining one’s vrutti on the form of the incarnate God visible at
present.”

3

Continuing, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “The extent to which one has
understood the greatness of God determines the intensity of both the
divine light experienced in the heart and the divine sound of pranav
that is heard.
Furthermore, the extent of one’s faith and
understanding of the greatness of God determines the extent to which
The Vachanãmrut

35

vicious thoughts are curbed. Thus, when one develops absolute faith
in God and thoroughly understands His greatness, all of one’s vicious
thoughts are eliminated.
4

“For example, if a person has sucked a slice of lemon, his teeth
become a little sensitive, but he is still able to chew soft chanã.
However, if he has sucked a whole lemon, he is unable to chew even
chanã; in fact, he chews even a mung bean with much difficulty. If,
however, he has sucked many lemons, he would be unable to chew
even cooked rice. In the same manner, when one has developed
‘sourness’ in the form of faith in God and an understanding of His
greatness, one’s gums – in the form of the four antahkarans and ten
indriyas – become sensitised. In that state, the jiva is unable to
chew chanã in the form of thoughts for the vishays with its gums in
the form of the man. With its gums in the form of the chitt, the jiva
becomes incapable of contemplating on the vishays. With its gums in
the form of the buddhi, the jiva becomes incapable of developing a
resolve for the vishays. With its gums in the form of the ahamkãr,
the jiva becomes incapable of developing any form of consciousness
related to the vishays. Similarly, the jiva, with its gums in the form
of the five gnãn-indriyas and five karma-indriyas, becomes incapable
of chewing chanã in the form of the vishays of the respective
indriyas.

5

“Conversely, the indriyas and the antahkaran of a person who
does not have absolute faith in God and who has not fully realised the
greatness of God do not withdraw completely from their respective
vishays.”

6

Shriji Mahãrãj then explained, “The form of God transcends
mãyã and its gunas, and is free of all types of flaws, but it is for the
sake of the liberation of jivas that He appears to be like a human. In
fact, God is devoid of each of the flaws that senseless people attribute
to Him. However, the intellect of the person attributing such flaws
will never be freed of those flaws that he attributes to God.
Specifically, a person who believes God to be full of lust will himself
become intensely full of lust; a person who believes God to be full of
anger will himself become intensely full of anger; a person who
believes God to be full of avarice will himself become intensely full of
avarice; and a person who believes God to be full of jealousy will
himself become intensely full of jealousy; etc. In fact, whatever types
of flaws a person attributes to God will ultimately cause misery to the
The Vachanãmrut

36

person himself – just as a fistful of sand thrown at the sun falls back
into the thrower’s eyes. On the other hand, if a person realises God
to be absolutely flawless, then regardless of his own swabhãvs, he
himself becomes absolutely flawless as well.”
7

Thereafter, Brahmãnand Swãmi asked, “Suppose there is a
person whose indriyas are not drawn towards any of the vishays; nor
do vicious thoughts arise in his antahkaran. He also has absolute
faith in God. Despite this, though, a feeling of unfulfillment remains,
and he feels despondent within. What can be the reason for this?”

8

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “That is also a major deficiency in the
devotee; i.e., despite the fact that his mind has become stable and
despite the fact that he has intensely firm faith in God, he still fails
to experience profound happiness in his heart. Specifically, he does
not feel, ‘I am extremely fortunate and completely fulfilled, whereas
others in the world are constantly being troubled by lust, anger,
avarice, infatuation, arrogance, matsar, desires and cravings. They
are subject to the three types of sufferingsi day and night. As for me,
the incarnate form of Purushottam has compassionately revealed His
own form to me. He has also freed me from lust, anger and all of the
other vicious natures. He has also placed me in the company of
sãdhus similar to Nãrad and the Sanakãdik. Indeed, I am very
fortunate.’ Failing to think in this manner, and failing to remain
extremely elated throughout the day is a major deficiency. In fact,
such a devotee is like a child who has been given a chintãmani in its
hand, yet derives no happiness from it because it does not realise the
chintãmani’s value. Similarly, the major drawback of that devotee is
that despite having attained Purushottam Bhagwãn, he does not feel
constant elation within by realising, ‘I am completely fulfilled.’

9

“Moreover, when a fault is noticed in a devotee, one should
think, ‘His swabhãv is such that it is not suitable in the Satsang
fellowship; nevertheless, he has attained satsang. Regardless of what
he is like, he has still remained in the Satsang fellowship. Surely,
then, his sanskãrs from past lives or from this very life must be
extremely favourable for him to have attained this satsang.’ With
i The three types of sufferings are adhidaiv (those caused by nature and deities),

adhibhut (those caused by other men or animals), adhyãtma (those caused by
one’s own mind)

The Vachanãmrut

37

this understanding, one should highly appreciate even such a
person’s virtues.”
10

After this discourse, Shriji Mahãrãj bid ‘Jai Sachchidãnand’ to
everyone and returned to His residence.
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-24 || 24 ||

Gadhadã I-25
The Flow of Twenty Pails of Water
1

On the morning of Posh sudi 7, Samvat 1876 [23 December
1819], Shriji Mahãrãj arrived at the residence of the paramhansas in
Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was wearing a white khes
and had covered Himself with a thick, white cotton cloth. He had
also tied a white feto around His head. He was sitting facing east on
the western veranda. At that time, paramhansas as well as devotees
from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said out of compassion, “A devotee of
God who observes only swadharma does not feel completely fulfilled
within his heart. That feeling of fulfillment can only be attained by
ãtmã-realisation and the knowledge of God’s greatness. Moreover,
the extent of the deficiency in these two attributes determines the
extent of the deficiency in his experience of fulfillment. Therefore, a
devotee of God should firmly cultivate these two qualities.

3

“Moreover, the extent of the deficiency remaining in these two
factors also determines the extent of the hindrances experienced
during samãdhi. Recently, I granted samãdhi to a devotee in which
she saw intense divine light. Seeing that light, she began to scream;
she shouted, ‘I’m burning!’ Therefore, even those who experience
samãdhi require ãtmã-realisation. If one does not realise one’s own
self to be the ãtmã and instead believes one’s self to be the body,
much deficiency will remain. I explained to that devotee, ‘Your self is
the ãtmã, not the body. You are not this Lãdkibãi of the Bhãt subcaste. Rather, your self is the ãtmã, which is unpierceable and
uncuttable.’ I then placed her into samãdhi again and told her, ‘Go
to the four-petalled lotus at the site of Ganapati and behold your own
self there.’

4

“When a person in samãdhi enters the site of Ganapati, that
person hears divine sounds and sees divine light. When he enters the
The Vachanãmrut

38

higher site of Brahmã, he hears louder sounds and sees brighter
light. When he enters the still higher site of Vishnu, he hears even
louder sounds and sees even brighter light. In this manner, as he
enters higher and higher locations, he hears increasingly louder
sounds and sees increasingly brighter light. As a result of the
intense divine light seen in samãdhi, and the loud thunderous sounds
that occur, even the most resolute become timid. For example,
despite being a devotee of God and despite being extremely brave,
Arjun was still incapable of beholding God’s Vishwarup form. He
therefore pleaded, ‘O Mahãrãj! I am incapable of beholding this form
of yours. Please grant me darshan of your former form.’ Similarly,
in samãdhi, when thundering noises like those of an entire
brahmãnd exploding are heard, and masses of intense light like
overflowing oceans are seen, even the brave lose their patience.
Therefore, one should understand one’s own self to be distinct from
the body.
5

“Samãdhi experienced in this manner is achieved in two ways.
One is controlling the prãns through prãnãyãm, whereby the chitt is
also controlled. The other is by controlling the chitt, whereby the
prãns are also controlled. When is control over the chitt achieved? It
is achieved when one’s vruttis are detached from everything else and
focused only on God. However, these vruttis can be focused on God
only when desires for everything else are overcome and only a
singular desire for the form of God remains. Thereafter, those
vruttis will not be deflected from God’s form by any means
whatsoever. For example, if twenty pails of water are drawn from a
well, and the flow of water from each pail allowed to flow in separate
directions, then there would be little force in each flow. However, if
the flow of all twenty pails of water are combined, then the resultant
flow would become extremely powerful – like that of a river – and
would not be able to be diverted by any means whatsoever.
Similarly, when a person’s vruttis have become free of worldly
desires, his chitt focuses only on God’s form.

6

“Conversely, when a person has desires in his chitt for the
pleasures of the world, his vrutti is widely dispersed among countless
types of sounds via the ears. Similarly, via the skin, the vrutti is
dispersed among thousands of different types of touch sensations; the
vrutti of the eyes is dispersed among thousands of different types of
things to see; the vrutti of the tongue is dispersed among thousands
of different types of tastes; and the vrutti of the nose is dispersed
The Vachanãmrut

39

among countless types of smells. In the same manner, the vruttis of
his karma-indriyas are dispersed among their respective vishays in
thousands of different ways. In this way, via the ten indriyas, his
antahkaran is dispersed in thousands of different ways. Only when
his chitt contemplates on God, and his man generates thoughts of
God, and his buddhi establishes the conviction of God, and his
ahamkãr harbours the consciousness, ‘I am the ãtmã, and a devotee
of God,’ can his desire for God be known to have become singular.
7

“Alternatively, the control of the chitt by controlling the prãns is
achieved by ashtãng-yoga, which comprises of eight stages: yam,
niyam, ãsan, prãnãyãm, pratyãhãr, dhyãn, dhãrnã and samãdhi.
This ashtãng-yoga is a means, and its fruit is the nirvikalp samãdhi
of God. When this nirvikalp samãdhi is achieved, the chitt is
controlled by controlling the prãns. On the other hand, if the chitt
focuses on God after becoming free of worldly desires, then the prãns
are controlled by control of the chitt. Therefore, just as the chitt is
controlled by mastering ashtãng-yoga, similarly, the chitt can also be
controlled by focusing on the form of God. A devotee whose chitt’s
vrutti becomes focused on the form of God masters ashtãng-yoga
without even attempting to master it. Therefore, the spiritual
endeavours of ãtmã-realisation and the knowledge of God’s greatness
that I have just described should be firmly practised.

8

“Furthermore, one’s religious vows – which are God’s
injunctions – should certainly be observed. For example, the dharma
of a Brãhmin is to bathe, lead a pure life and never drink even water
from a Shudra’s house. Similarly, a satsangi should never falter in
observing God’s injunctions. Why? Because God will be pleased with
him if he behaves accordingly.

9

“Moreover, a person should very firmly maintain both the
knowledge of God’s greatness as well as the knowledge of the ãtmã
coupled with vairãgya. He should also feel fulfilled by realising, ‘Now
I have no deficiencies remaining.’ With this understanding, he
should constantly offer bhakti to God. Having said this though, he
should not get carried away in the elation of this understanding. Nor
should he feel unfulfilled. If he does feel unfulfilled, then the
blessings that have been showered upon him by God can be
considered as not having germinated – like a seed sown in saline soil.
Conversely, if he gets carried away and begins to behave waywardly,
then that is like having thrown a seed into a fire, which burns it.
The Vachanãmrut

40

Therefore, if one understands as I have explained, then no form of
deficiency will remain whatsoever.”
After saying this, Shriji Mahãrãj returned to His seat.

10

|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-25 || 25 ||

Gadhadã I-26
A Genuine Amorous Devotee; The Nirgun State
1

On the afternoon of Posh sudi 11, Samvat 1876 [27 December
1819], Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot on the
veranda outside the east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in
Gadhadã. He had tied a white pãgh around His head. He was
wearing a white khes and had covered Himself with a thick, white
cotton cloth. Two large guldãvadi flowers had been placed upon His
ears, and a tassel of flowers had been inserted in His pãgh. At that
time, while some paramhansas were singing devotional songs to the
accompaniment of a tãl and pakhwãj, other paramhansas as well as
devotees from various places had gathered before Him in an
assembly.

2

Shriji Mahãrãj then said, “Now please stop singing and listen as
I sing a devotional song in the form of a discourse.”
The paramhansas said in return, “Very well, Mahãrãj. Please

3

do.”
4

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “If, while singing amorous
devotional songs, a person is attracted only by God’s form, then that
is fine.
But, being attracted to anything except God’s form
constitutes a major deficiency. Why? Because just as that devotee
develops affection for and is attracted by sounds related to God, he
also develops affection for and is attracted by worldly songs, musical
instruments, talks related to women, etc. Such a devotee should be
known to lack wisdom. Thus, a person who is attracted to an equal
extent by the words of God and His Sant, and by worldly speech
should forsake such foolishness. Having forsaken such foolishness,
he should experience happiness through sounds and speech related
only to God. Such a person is a genuine amorous devotee.

5

“Furthermore, just as that devotee wishes for sounds related
only to God, he desires the touch only of God. When he realises other
types of touch to be like touching a black cobra or a blazing fire, then
The Vachanãmrut

41

he is a genuine amorous devotee. Similarly, if a person experiences
profound bliss on seeing God, realising everything else to be like a
pile of filth or a decomposed dog, then he is a genuine amorous
devotee. Similarly, if a person experiences profound bliss on tasting
the prasãd of God, not enjoying the various other types of tastes, then
he is a genuine amorous devotee. Furthermore, such a devotee
experiences profound bliss on smelling tulsi, garlands of flowers,
sandalwood paste, the many varieties of fragrant perfumes, etc., that
have been offered to God. He is not pleased on smelling the perfume,
sandalwood paste, or garlands of flowers worn by materialistic people.
In this manner, a person who has intense love for God-related
vishays and an intense aversion for worldly vishays is a genuine
amorous devotee.
6

“On the other hand, a person who becomes an amorous devotee
and yet derives the same pleasure from other types of sights, sounds,
smells, tastes and touch as he does from God-related vishays is a
false amorous devotee. Why? Because he experiences the same type
of joy from vishays as he does from God.
Therefore, such
amorousness and mode of worship should be forsaken. Why?
Because it is not God who is at fault; it is the amorous devotee’s
attitude that is at fault; i.e., he has believed God to be exactly like
other objects. As a result, his bhakti and amorousness are flawed.

7

“Now, just as I have described discretion in indulging in the five
types of vishays for the sthul body in the waking state, similarly,
subtle vishays exist for the sukshma body in the dream state. A
devotee may experience happiness from God-related sights, sounds,
smells, tastes and touch on seeing the form of God in his dream, but
if he also derives exactly the same pleasure on seeing other vishays in
his dream, then that devotee’s amorousness is false. If, on the other
hand, a person in his dream experiences happiness only by
association with God and feels an aversion for other vishays as if they
were vomited food, then he can be said to be a genuine amorous
devotee. If he does not experience this, then although the form of God
seen in his dream is true, that devotee’s understanding is flawed.
Why? Because he has equal love for God and for other vishays.
Thus, true understanding is to remain attracted only towards the
form of God, and not towards other vishays.

8

“In this way, when only thoughts of God remain while
contemplating, a state of void is attained wherein, with the exception
The Vachanãmrut

42

of the form of God, that devotee does not perceive the body or the
brahmãnd at all. Thereafter, while seeing the form of God within
that void, divine light is generated, and the form of God is seen
within that light. So, affection towards only the form of God in this
manner is called faithful bhakti.”
9

In conclusion, Shriji Mahãrãj added, “When you sing amorous
devotional songs, I also close My eyes and think about just this.
These thoughts of Mine may be simple, but nothing is able to persist
in those thoughts except God. In fact, so powerful are My thoughts
that if any vishay were to come in the way of the amorous love that I
have for God’s form, it would be decapitated. Just as you sing
devotional songs, I have also sung a devotional song in the form of
this discourse, which I have shared with all of you today.”

10

In this way, using Himself as an example, Shriji Mahãrãj
delivered this discourse for the benefit of His devotees.
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-26 || 26 ||

Gadhadã I-27
The Understanding by which God
Eternally Resides within One
1

Before sunrise on Posh sudi 12, Samvat 1876 [28 December
1819], Shriji Mahãrãj arrived at the residential hall of the
paramhansas in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. There, He sat
on a platform facing west. He had tied a white feto around His head.
He had also covered Himself with a thick, white cotton cloth and was
wearing a khes. At that time, an assembly of paramhansas had
gathered before Him.

2

After a few minutes of contemplation, Shriji Mahãrãj said,
“Everyone wishes to worship God, but their understanding differs.
But God fully resides in the heart of a person who possesses the
following understanding: ‘The earth remains stable and trembles; the
stars remain steady in the sky; the rains fall; the sun rises and sets;
the moon appears and disappears, waxes and wanes; the vast oceans
remain constrained within their boundaries; a drop of liquid develops
into a human possessing hands, feet, a nose, ears and the rest of the
ten indriyas; the clouds, through which lightning strikes, float
unsupported in the sky – these and a countless variety of other
The Vachanãmrut

43

wonders are due only to the form of God that I have attained.’ With
this understanding, he has the conviction that no one except the
incarnate form of God is the cause of these wonders. He realises,
‘The countless wonders which have occurred in the past, those which
are currently taking place, and those which will occur in the future
are all only due to the manifest form of God that I have attained.’
3

“Moreover, he also has the following understanding: ‘Even if
someone were to throw dust on me, or were to humiliate me in any
way, or were to seat me on a donkey after cutting off my nose and
ears; or even if someone were to honour me by seating me on an
elephant – all these situations would be equal for me.’ Such a devotee
views a beautiful young woman, an unattractive woman and an old
woman with equality; he treats a heap of gold and a pile of stones
with equality; he also possesses countless noble virtues such as gnãn,
bhakti, vairãgya, etc. God eternally resides in the heart of such a
devotee.

4

“Consequently, by the grace of God, that devotee attains
countless types of powers and liberates countless beings. Despite
these powers, though, he tolerates the praises and insults of other
people. This itself is also a great feat, because to tolerate despite
being so powerful is not easy for others to achieve. Therefore, one
who tolerates in this manner should be considered to be extremely
great.

5

“The powers of such a person are such that since it is God who
sees through his eyes, he empowers the eyes of all of the beings in the
brahmãnd; and since it is God who walks through his legs, he is also
capable of endowing the strength to walk to the legs of all of the
beings in the brahmãnd. Thus, since it is God who resides in all of
the indriyas of such a Sant, that Sant is able to empower the
indriyas of all beings in the brahmãnd. Therefore, such a Sant is
the sustainer of the world. His greatness lies in the fact that he
tolerates the insults delivered even by insignificant people. Only
those who are forgiving in this manner should be considered to be
extremely great.

6

“On the other hand, those who threaten and frighten those
meeker than themselves and believe, ‘I have become great,’ are not
truly great. In fact, those people in this world who frighten others by
showing yogic powers should not be considered to be devotees of God;
rather, they are beings lost in mãyã and suitable only for Yampuri.
The Vachanãmrut

44

Their greatness is limited to the worldly realm. For example, in
society, a person with one horse is considered to be greater than
someone with no horses at all; whereas a person with five horses is
considered to be greater than someone with only one horse. In this
way, the wealthier a person is, the greater he is considered to be in
society. However, such a person is not great in the spiritual realm.”
7

Continuing, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Householders and renunciants
who believe, ‘This woman is very beautiful; these clothes are
extremely fashionable; this house is very nice; this gourd is very nice
and this utensil is very nice’ are all petty-minded. Then you may ask
whether such people will attain liberation or not. Well, in this
Satsang fellowship, even the wretched attain liberation. However,
the former persons never develop the virtues of a sãdhu, or the noble
virtues of the Sant previously described. Why? Because they have
not become suitable for such nobility.”

8

After delivering this discourse, Shriji Mahãrãj bid ‘Jai
Sachchidãnand’ to all and returned to His residence in Dãdã
Khãchar’s darbãr.
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-27 || 27 ||

Gadhadã I-28
A Smouldering Log; Progressing and Regressing
1

On Posh sudi 14, Samvat 1876 [30 December 1819], Shriji
Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot on the veranda outside
the room in line with the room of Shri Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã
Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white
clothes. At that time, the sãdhus had sat down to eat in His
presence.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “When a satsangi is likely to
regress in the Satsang fellowship, vicious desires steadily flourish
within him. At first, he begins to perceive flaws in all of the
satsangis day by day. In his heart, he feels, ‘All of these satsangis
lack understanding; only I have true understanding.’ In this way, he
considers himself to be superior to all. Such a person remains
constantly uneasy, day and night. He cannot sit peacefully anywhere
during the day; nor can he sleep at night. Moreover, his anger never
subsides. In fact, he constantly smoulders like a half-burnt log. A
The Vachanãmrut

45

person who behaves in this manner should be known to be on the
verge of falling out of Satsang. No matter how many days he spends
in Satsang, he will never experience peace in his heart; ultimately,
he will fall from Satsang.
3

“Conversely, when a person is likely to progress in Satsang, pure
desires steadily flourish within him. Day by day, he sees only virtues
in all of the satsangis. He views all devotees as superior to himself
and considers himself to be insignificant. Moreover, he experiences
the bliss of Satsang in his heart 24 hours a day. Such characteristics
indicate that pure desires have flourished. In fact, the more such a
person practises satsang, the more he benefits; and eventually, he
attains profound greatness.”

4

Having delivered this discourse, Shriji Mahãrãj bid ‘Jai
Sachchidãnand’ to all and returned to His seat.
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-28 || 28 ||

Gadhadã I-29
Intensifying the Force of Dharma, Gnãn,
Vairãgya and Bhakti;
Prãrabdha, Grace and Personal Endeavour
1

2

On the evening of Posh sudi Punam, Samvat 1876 [31 December
1819], Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot on the
veranda outside the west-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in
Gadhadã. He was wearing a white khes and had covered Himself
with a thick, white cotton cloth. He had also tied a white pãgh
around His head. He was wearing garlands of white flowers, and
tassels of white flowers were dangling from His pãgh. At that time,
an assembly of sãdhus as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him.
Shriji Mahãrãj then said, “Please ask a question.”

3

Thereupon Gopãlãnand Swãmi asked, “How can the force of
bhakti coupled with dharma, gnãn and vairãgya be intensified?”

4

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “There are four means to accomplish
this: One is a pure place, the second is an auspicious time, the third
is pious actions, and the fourth is the company of a holy person 1. Of
these, the influence of actions is slight, whereas the influences of
The Vachanãmrut

46

place, time and company are more powerful. Why? Because, if a
place is pure, and the time is pure and one also keeps the company of
a sãdhu like yourself, then actions will naturally be pure as well.
Conversely, if a place is impure – like the region of Sindh, if the time
is impure, and if one also keeps the company of prostitutes and
perverted people, or of those who consume alcohol and meat, then
actions will certainly be impure as well. Therefore, one should stay
where there is a pure place and should abandon – by whatever means
necessary – a place where the time has become unfavourable. One
should keep the company of devotees of God as well as the company of
the Sant who is a knower of Brahma and who observes the five
religious vows4. As a result, a devotee’s bhakti for God gains
tremendous vigour. This is the answer to your question.”
5

Thereafter Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, initially a
devotee may be very impure at heart, but he later becomes extremely
pure. Is this due to his previous sanskãrs, the grace of God or the
devotee’s personal endeavours?”

6

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “The good or bad that occurs due to
one’s previous sanskãrs is apparent to everyone in the world. For
instance, the case of Bharatji becoming attached to a deer can be
understood to be due to prãrabdha. Or if a poor person were to
receive a large kingdom, then everyone would come to know of it.
That should be known as prãrabdha.”

7

Then, narrating His own story, Shriji Mahãrãj continued, “Now,
considering the spiritual endeavours I had performed, it is
inconceivable that My body should survive such austerities, yet even
in those circumstances it did survive. That can be considered to be
due to prãrabdha. What were those circumstances? Well, while
staying in Purushottampuri, I spent many months surviving merely
on air. On one occasion, I allowed My body to be carried away by a
river that was three to four gãus wide. During the winter, summer
and monsoon, I stayed without any shelter whatsoever, wearing only
a loincloth. I also used to wander in the jungle amongst wild animals
such as tigers, elephants and wild buffaloes. I travelled in countless
such arduous conditions, yet My body did not perish. In these
situations, one should consider prãrabdha to be responsible.

8

“Now consider the son of the Brãhmin named Sãndipani who
was saved from narak and also five-year-old Dhruvji, to whom the
meanings of the Vedas and other scriptures were spontaneously
The Vachanãmrut

47

revealed when he began to utter the praises of God. In these
situations, as well as when one’s mind is purified by the wish of God,
or by His grace, or by the grace of His Ekãntik Sant who has been
pleased by one’s extremely pure sentiments – the influence of God’s
grace should be considered to be responsible.
9

“If one keeps the company of a pious sãdhu and becomes
virtuous through one’s own thoughts, then that is known as ‘personal
endeavour’.”

10

Having said this, Shriji Mahãrãj bid ‘Jai Sachchidãnand’ to the
assembly and returned to His seat laughing.
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-29 || 29 ||

Gadhadã I-30
Thoughts that Leave a Lasting Impression
1

On Posh vadi 1, Samvat 1876 [1 January 1820], Shriji Mahãrãj
was sitting on a large, decorated cot on the veranda outside the room
facing north, in line with the mandir of Shri Vãsudevnãrãyan in
Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was wearing a white khes
and had covered Himself with a white cotton cloth. He had also tied
a white feto around His head. Around His neck were garlands of
white flowers, and tassels of white flowers were dangling from both of
His ears. He was also wearing a string of white flowers around His
wrists. At that time, while some munis were singing devotional
songs, other munis as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him in an assembly.

2

Shriji Mahãrãj then requested, “Please begin a question-answer
dialogue.”

3

Thereupon Dinãnãth Bhatt asked, “Mahãrãj, at times,
thousands of thoughtsi arise, yet they do not leave a lasting
impression in the mind.
At other times, however, only an
insignificant thought arises, yet it leaves a strong impression on the
mind. What is the reason for this? Also, by what means can a
devotee eradicate such disturbing thoughts?”
i Here ‘thoughts’ should be interpreted as worldly thoughts and desires, such as

thoughts of indulging in sense pleasures.

The Vachanãmrut

48

4

Shriji Mahãrãj answered, “The reason is the influence of the
gunas. Thoughts occurring when tamogun is predominant induce a
state similar to that of deep sleep. Therefore those thoughts do not
leave a lasting impression in the mind. When sattvagun prevails,
one experiences a state of awareness; so, any disturbing thoughts
that occur at that time are dispelled by contemplation. Therefore,
those thoughts do not leave a lasting impression either. However,
thoughts that arise when rajogun is prevalent do leave a lasting
impression in the mind. Therefore, the reason some thoughts do
leave a lasting impression in the mind and others do not is due to the
prevalence of the various gunas.

5

“If an intelligent person reflects on this matter and examines his
thoughts whenever they arise, he will be able to recognise which
guna is predominant in him at that particular time. However, subtle
thoughts that arise repeatedly from moment to moment cannot be
grasped by anyone. At the most, someone intelligent like yourself
may be able to discern two, three, or four of the more superficial
thoughts that arise during the course of a day.

6

“So, if a person examines the predominant guna under whose
influence his thoughts arise and contemplates on and imbibes the
spiritual discourses which take place in Satsang, then the power of
practising satsang is such that any disturbing thoughts arising
under the influence of the gunas are dispelled. Thereafter, becoming
free from all doubts, he is able to continuously concentrate on the
form of God. Without satsang, however, even if he endeavours in a
million other ways, disturbing thoughts and the influence of rajogun
and the other gunas will not be eradicated. Therefore, if someone
sincerely practises satsang and reflects upon and tries to imbibe the
discourses relating to God, then his vile thoughts are eradicated. In
this manner, the influence of satsang is extremely powerful. In fact,
no other spiritual endeavour can compare with satsang. Why?
Because thoughts which cannot be eradicated by any other spiritual
endeavour can be removed by engaging in satsang. Therefore, one
who wishes to rid the mind of base thoughts related to rajogun
should sincerely practise satsang by thought, word and deed. As a
result, those thoughts will be eradicated due to the power of satsang.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-30 || 30 ||

The Vachanãmrut

49

Gadhadã I-31
Greatness Is Due To Faith
1

On the evening of Posh vadi 2, Samvat 1876 [2 January 1820],
Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting on a cushion with a cylindrical pillow that
had been placed on the east-facing veranda outside His residence in
Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in
white clothes.

2

At that time, Yogãnand Muni asked, “Mahãrãj, suppose there
are two devotees of God. One observes nivrutti and does not hurt
anyone verbally. The other, however, is constantly serving God and
His Bhakta – by offering food, clothes, flowers, etc. In doing so,
however, he may occasionally hurt someone verbally. Of these two
devotees, who is better?”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj did not answer the question immediately;
instead, He called for Muktãnand Swãmi and Brahmãnand Swãmi.
He had them listen to the question, and then requested, “Please
answer this question.”

4

Both Muktãnand Swãmi and Brahmãnand Swãmi then
answered, “The devotee who may verbally hurt someone, but serves
God and the Sant is better. On the other hand, the one who observes
nivrutti without hurting anyone and is thereby unable to serve God
and the Sant, should be known to be feeble. The devotee who serves
others can be described as having bhakti; thus, the devotee with
bhakti is the better of the two.”

5

Shriji Mahãrãj confirmed, “The answer you have given is
correct.” He then added, “It is a major drawback if one notices some
negligible flaw and subsequently bears an aversion towards a person
who possesses such bhakti and implicitly abides by the injunctions of
God. A person who perceives flaws in this way may also perceive
flaws in God, who has assumed a human form for the purpose of
granting liberation to the jivas; he may also perceive flaws in the
profoundly great devotees of God.

6

“Moreover, just because such a person alleges such faults in God
or His Sant, does that render the avatãrs of God or the Sant
incapable of granting liberation? They are indeed capable of granting
liberation.
However, one whose intellect is distorted always
negatively misinterprets things. For example, Shishupãl always
maintained, ‘The Pãndavs are bastards; and because all five of them
The Vachanãmrut

50

have the same wife, they are also immoral. Krishna is also a
scoundrel, because from the moment he was born, first he killed a
woman, then he killed a crane, and then he killed a calf. He is
known as Madhusudan not because he killed a demon named Madhu,
but because he destroyed honeycombs. Just because those bastard
Pãndavs worship him, does that make him God?’ In this manner,
Shishupãl, with his demonic intellect, perceived flaws in God and His
devotees. However, those who were devotees of God did not do so in
any way. Therefore, one who perceives flaws should be known to
have a demonic intellect.”
7

Hearing this, Yogãnand Muni remarked, “But Mahãrãj, we do
not perceive flaws in the great devotees of God; we merely perceive
flaws in ordinary devotees.”

8

Shriji Mahãrãj said in return, “A devotee’s greatness or
smallness is not measured the way you seem to understand it.
Greatness is due to one’s faith in the manifest form of God and the
observance of His commands. However great a person may be in
worldly matters, if he lacks these two attributes then he is still
ordinary.

9

“Besides, the greatness which I have just described is present
today in all of the devotees in our Satsang fellowship. Why? Because
all of the devotees here realise, ‘We have attained
Purushottam Bhagwãn – who transcends even Akshar – in a
manifest form; and thus we have become fulfilled.’ Realising this,
they offer bhakti to the manifest form of God while following His
commands.
Therefore, on seeing some insignificant personal
peculiarity in such a devotee, one should not perceive flaws in him.
Moreover, if a person does have a habit of doing so, his intellect
becomes demonic.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-31 || 31 ||

Gadhadã I-32
A Nest and a Stake
1

On the morning of Posh vadi 3, Samvat 1876 [3 January 1820],
Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot on the veranda
outside the west-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.
He was wearing a white khes and had tied a white pãgh around His
The Vachanãmrut

51

head. He had also covered Himself with a white cotton cloth.
Sandalwood paste had been applied to His forehead. He was wearing
a garland of white flowers, and tassels of white flowers were dangling
from His pãgh. At that time, while some munis were singing
devotional songs, other munis as well as devotees from various places
had gathered before Him in an assembly.
2

3

Shriji Mahãrãj then said, “Please listen, I have a question to
ask.”
Thereupon the munis and devotees said, “Mahãrãj, please ask.”

4

After thinking for quite some time, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “In this
world, a materialistic individual who is attached to the vishays
cannot survive without indulging in them. Moreover, just as that
non-believer indulges in vishays, similarly, a devotee of God also
indulges in vishays. However, the two are different. In what way?
Well, the materialistic person, who is attached to the vishays, enjoys
only worldly vishays, whereas for a devotee of God, listening to
discourses of God is the only vishay for his ears; touching the holy
feet of God or touching the holy dust from the feet of the Sant is the
only vishay for his skin; doing darshan of God or the Sant is the only
vishay for his eyes; taking the prasãd of God and singing His praises
are the only vishays for his tongue; and smelling the flowers and
other objects which have been offered to God is the only vishay for his
nose. In this manner, there is a difference between the vishays that
a non-believer indulges in and those that a devotee indulges in.

5

“Furthermore, just as a devotee cannot stay without indulging
in the vishays, even eternally liberated muktas such as Nãrad and
the Sanakãdik cannot stay without indulging in them. Although
they remain in samãdhi for long periods of time, after emerging from
samãdhi, they also indulge in vishays in the form of discourses,
talks, devotional songs, etc., related to God.

6

“For example, birds leave their nests to gather food, but after
gathering their food, they always return to their respective nests at
night to rest. Never do they forget their own nests and return to
another bird’s nest. Similarly, after feeding on discourses, talks,
devotional songs, etc., related to God, devotees of God also return to
their own nest in the form of God to rest. Again, animals, birds and,
in fact, all creatures, return to their respective homes to rest after
feeding. People also travel far and wide for their work, but only when
they return to their own home do they rest peacefully.
The Vachanãmrut

52

7

“Now based on the analogies that I have just narrated, I ask all
the devotees: Just as a non-believer is attached to worldly vishays
and is unable to live without them for even a single moment,
similarly, after becoming firmly attached to the vishays in the form
of the shravan, manan, etc., of the talks and discourses related to
God, have you also become attached to and engrossed in them, or not?
Also, just as a bird returns to its nest after feeding, do all of you also
return to rest in your nest, the form of God, after feeding on feed in
the form of discourses, devotional songs, etc., related to God? Or, do
you rest elsewhere?

8

“Furthermore, cattle that are domesticated return to their stake
in the evening after grazing in the outskirts of the village, whereas
stray cattle do not return to their stake. A stray cow, after grazing
in someone’s field, sits wherever it wishes. There, someone may beat
it, or if a tiger comes, it may even attack the cow. Now, do you
return to your stake like the domesticated cattle, or like the stray
cattle, do you sit down to rest anywhere after grazing in someone
else’s field? Let the seniors amongst you answer these questions
after due deliberation.”

9

Thereupon, all of the munis and devotees replied individually,
“Mahãrãj, we have indeed become attached to discourses, devotional
songs, etc., related to God. Moreover, except for the nest and stake in
the form of God’s form, we do not stay anywhere else.” Hearing their
reply, Shriji Mahãrãj became extremely pleased.

10

Towards the end of the afternoon on that same day, Shriji
Mahãrãj was seated facing the mandir of Shri Vãsudevnãrãyan on a
large, decorated cot under the neem tree in the centre of Dãdã
Khãchar’s darbãr. At that time, while some munis were singing
devotional songs, other munis as well as devotees from various places
had gathered before Him in an assembly.

11

Shriji Mahãrãj then requested, “Now please begin a questionanswer dialogue.”

12

Thereupon Dinãnãth Bhatt and Brahmãnand Swãmi asked, “At
times, a devotee of God is able to blissfully engage in the worship and
remembrance of God, and is able to concentrate on His form. At
other times, however, he is disturbed within and is unable to
experience the bliss of worship and remembrance. What is the
reason for this?”
The Vachanãmrut

53

13

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “He has not mastered the technique of
beholding the form of God.”

14

Hearing this, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “What is that
technique?”

15

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “The technique is as follows: Different
gunas enter the antahkaran at different times. When sattvagun
prevails, the antahkaran is pure, and one can pleasantly engage in
worship and remembrance of God’s form. When rajogun prevails,
the antahkaran becomes polluted and many disturbing thoughts
arise, making it difficult to engage in worship and remembrance.
When tamogun prevails, no thoughts arise in the antahkaran at all.
Therefore, a person engaged in worship should learn to recognise the
prevailing guna and should meditate on the form of God whenever
sattvagun prevails. When tamogun prevails, no thoughts arise at
all, and one experiences a feeling of emptiness. One should not
attempt to meditate on God in such conditions. When rajogun
prevails, many disturbing thoughts arise. Therefore, one should not
attempt to meditate on God at that time either. On such occasions,
one should think, ‘I am distinct from these thoughts. In fact, I am
the knower of these thoughts. Furthermore, Purushottam Bhagwãn
is forever present within me as antaryãmi.’ Only when the force of
rajogun subsides should one meditate on the form of God.

16

“However, one should not become dejected on noticing the many
thoughts which arise when rajogun prevails.
After all, the
antahkaran is like a small child, or a monkey, or a dog, or like a
person who plays with a child. The nature of the antahkaran is such
that it remains fidgety for no reason whatsoever. Therefore, one who
wishes to meditate on God should not become disheartened on seeing
the disturbing thoughts that arise in the antahkaran. Moreover, the
thoughts arising in the antahkaran should not be accepted as being a
part of oneself; instead, the antahkaran should be regarded as being
distinct from oneself. Thus, one should believe one’s ãtmã to be
distinct and engage in the worship of God.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-32 || 32 ||

The Vachanãmrut

54

Gadhadã I-33
Blind Faith, Love and Understanding
1

On the evening of Posh vadi 5, Samvat 1876 [5 January 1820],
Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting facing east on a large, decorated cot on the
veranda outside the room next to the mandir of Shri Vãsudevnãrãyan
in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was wearing a white
khes and had covered Himself with a white cotton cloth. He had also
tied a deep orange reto around His head. At that time, an assembly
of munis as well as devotees from various places had gathered before
Him.

2

Thereupon Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “The scriptures have
described innumerable spiritual endeavours to please God; but
amongst them all, which one is so powerful that it alone earns as
much pleasure of God as is earned by performing all spiritual
endeavours combined? Please reveal it to us.”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj began by saying, “Please listen as I tell you the
one spiritual endeavour by which God can be pleased.” He then
continued, “Accepting the firm refuge of God is the single, greatest
endeavour amongst all spiritual endeavours for pleasing God. That
refuge, though, must be extremely firm and without any flaws.

4

“This refuge can be of three types. One way of having the refuge
of God is with blind faith. If a person has intense blind faith, then
even if someone such as Brahmã were to attempt to deflect him from
his refuge, he would not be deflected.

5

“The second type is firm refuge of God that is cultivated out of
love. Even if a person possessing profound love for God forces
himself, he does not become attracted to any object other than God.
This is known as firm refuge produced out of profound love.

6

“The third type is with understanding. A person who has
profound intelligence understands the sagun-nirgun and anvayvyatirek aspects of God. He understands the entities that have been
created by God’s mãyã, as well as the ways of God’s avatãrs on earth.
He also understands how, at the time of the creation of the cosmos,
God behaves as Akshar, how God behaves as Prakruti-Purush, how
God behaves as Virãt-Purush, and how God behaves as Brahmã and
other prajãpatis. He also comprehends how God works through
Nãrad, the Sanakãdik and others for the purpose of granting
liberation to the jivas. He understands all these methods. Moreover,
The Vachanãmrut

55

he realises that Purushottam Bhagwãn transcends everything and is
absolutely unaffected. He who has such an insight is said to have a
firm refuge of God using his intelligence. If someone tries to dissuade
him, or even if he tries to dissuade himself, such a refuge never
diminishes. Also, regardless of whether God – after assuming a
human form – exhibits His divine powers or acts powerless, such a
person’s intellect would not harbour any doubts.”
7

8

Thereafter, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “If you allow Me, I wish to ask a
question.”
Muktãnand Swãmi said, “Mahãrãj, please do ask.”

9

Thereupon, Shriji Mahãrãj asked, “Of the three inclinations I
have just described to you, which is your inclination? After all,
although a combination of all three inclinations is generally present
in all devotees of God, the inclination that is predominant is said to
be the inclination they possess. So, of the three – blind faith, love
and understanding – which is your inclination?”

10

Muktãnand Swãmi and Brahmãnand Swãmi both replied, “Our
inclination is of understanding.”

11

Thereafter, the other sãdhus also stated their own inclinations.
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-33 ||

Gadhadã I-34
Setting the World in Motion
1

On the morning of Posh vadi 11, Samvat 1876 [11 January
1820], Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting facing south on a large, decorated
cot on the veranda outside the west-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s
darbãr in Gadhadã. He was wearing a white khes and had covered
Himself with a thick, white cotton cloth. He had also tied a white
pãgh around His head and was wearing garlands of flowers as well.
Tassels of flowers and silken threads were dangling from His pãgh,
and bunches of flowers had also been placed upon both of His ears.
At that time, some munis were singing devotional songs to the
accompaniment of musical instruments, while other munis as well as
satsangis from various places had gathered before Him in an
assembly.

The Vachanãmrut

56

2

Then Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Please stop the devotional songs and
begin a question-answer dialogue.”

3

Thereupon Brahmãnand Swãmi asked, “God is the haven of all
bliss, and He transcends everything, yet the jiva’s vrutti does not
become attached to Him. Instead, its vrutti becomes attached to
worldly objects that are worthless and perishable. What is the
reason for this?”

4

Muktãnand Swãmi attempted to give an answer, but was unable
to do so satisfactorily.

5

So Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Please listen as I answer that question.
Since the day God created this world, He has set it in motion in such
a manner that He will not have to toil again. In fact, He has devised
it in such a way that procreation occurs automatically. Men
naturally develop affection for women, women naturally develop
affection for men, and both naturally develop affection for their
offspring. That is God’s mãyã in the form of affection. The vrutti of
one who is not swept away by the flow of that mãyã remains focused
on the form of God. So, a devotee of God develops vairãgya by
maintaining an aversion for worldly objects. Furthermore, knowing
God to be absolutely blissful, he keeps his vrutti focused on God. If,
however, one does not cultivate vairãgya towards worldly objects and
becomes distanced from the form of God, then even great muktas
such as Shiv, Brahmã, Nãrad, etc., would be swept away by those
worldly objects. For this reason, if one forsakes God and keeps the
company of worldly objects, then one’s vrutti will most certainly
become attached to those worldly objects. Therefore, devotees of God
should not keep affection for anything other than God.”

6

Thereafter Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Now it is Muktãnand Swãmi’s
turn to ask a question, so please ask.”

7

Muktãnand Swãmi then asked, “It is extremely difficult for a
person to attain God. Moreover, there is no greater benefit and no
greater bliss than attaining God. Why, then, do people forsake such
immense bliss and strive agonisingly for worthless objects? That is
the question.”

8

Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Here, I shall answer that. When one
ignores the injunctions of God and begins to stray away from them,
one suffers. On the other hand, if one acts according to those
injunctions, one will experience the true bliss of God. So, in fact, one
The Vachanãmrut

57

suffers only to the extent that one transgresses the injunctions of
God. Therefore, renunciants should live according to the injunctions
that have been prescribed for renunciants, and householders should
live according to the injunctions that have been prescribed for
householders. One suffers to the extent that one lapses in observing
these injunctions. Only when a renunciant observes eight-fold
renunciation of women is his vow of brahmacharya considered
complete. He suffers to the extent that he deviates from this.
Brahmacharya has also been prescribed for householders. For them,
brahmacharya constitutes shunning all women except their wives,
abstinence from sexual relations with one’s wife on days of
observance, and engaging in sexual relations only during appropriate
times. Whosoever deviates from these and the other niyams that
have been prescribed for renunciants and householders, suffers
accordingly.
9

“Therefore, the happiness and misery experienced by a nonbeliever is determined by his own karmas. As for a devotee of God,
whatever misery he suffers is due to negligence in observing God’s
injunctions for the sake of worthless objects; and whatever happiness
he does experience is a result of following the injunctions of God.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-34 || 34 ||

Gadhadã I-35
Safeguarding One’s Liberation
1

On Posh vadi 12, Samvat 1876 [12 January 1820], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting facing east on a large, decorated
cot under the neem tree in front of the mandir of Shri
Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was
dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, an assembly of munis
as well as devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Addressing the munis, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Either you ask Me
a question, or I shall ask you a question.”

3
4

Thereupon the munis said, “Mahãrãj, please ask.”
Shriji Mahãrãj then said, “Suppose there is a person who,
despite having little intelligence, does not falter when it comes to
safeguarding his own liberation. On the other hand, there is another
person who is very intelligent; so much so that he can point out
The Vachanãmrut

58

mistakes even in great men. But he does not walk on the path of
liberation. What is the reason for this?”
5

The munis attempted to answer, but as Shriji Mahãrãj raised
doubts, they were unable to do so satisfactorily.

6

Shriji Mahãrãj then said, “Here, allow Me to answer. Such a
person may be highly intelligent, but his intellect is polluted. As a
result, he is unable to walk on the path of liberation. For example,
suppose there is some tasty buffalo-milk in which sãkar has been
dissolved. Now if a snake’s venom were to fall in it, then that same
milk and sãkar would become poisonous. Thereafter, whoever drinks
it would die. Similarly, such a person may be highly intelligent, but
he has perceived a flaw in the great Sant or God. This drawback, in
the form of perceiving a flaw, has entered his mind and is comparable
to the snake’s venom. So how can he possibly walk on the path of
liberation? In fact, even if someone were to listen to his talks, the
listener’s mind would also fall back from Satsang. Moreover,
wherever a person possessing such a polluted intellect takes birth, he
always maligns God or His devotees. Conversely, a person whose
intellect is not polluted in this manner, even if he has little
intelligence, does not falter in safeguarding his own liberation.”

7

Thereupon Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, can one with
such a polluted intellect ever turn towards God?”

8

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “No, he never turns towards God.”

9

Muktãnand Swãmi asked further, “Mahãrãj, please tell us how
we can avoid developing such a demonic intellect.”

10

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “If a person does not keep the following
four swabhãvs with God or His Sant, then his intellect will never
become demonic: first, anger; second, arrogance; third, jealousy; and
fourth, deceit. If, however, he keeps even one of these four, then his
intellect will become demonic – just like Jay and Vijay. Despite
being wise, their intellect became demonic because they were
arrogant towards the Sanakãdik. Consequently, both fell from
Vaikunth.

11

“Furthermore, when a person’s intellect becomes demonic, even
the virtues of God and His devotees appear as faults to him.
Wherever such a person takes birth, he either becomes an attendant
of Shiv or the king of some demons and worships God through
animosity.”
The Vachanãmrut

59

|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-35 || 35 ||

Gadhadã I-36
A True Renunciant, Based on
the Example of a Pauper
1

On Posh vadi 13, Samvat 1876 [13 January 1820], Shriji
Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot on the platform under
the neem tree in front of the mandir of Shri Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã
Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white
clothes, with garlands of white and yellow flowers adorning His neck.
Bunches of white flowers were placed on both of His ears, and a tassel
of yellow flowers was dangling from His pãgh. A chhoglu made from
red karnikãr flowers had also been placed in His pãgh. Also, He was
playing with a ball of white flowers with His right hand. To the joy
of the devotees He sat adorned in such a charming fashion. At that
time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees from various places
had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “How should one view a person
who has renounced worldly life and accepted the garb of a
renunciant, yet still harbours affection for asat objects, i.e., objects
other than the form of God? He should be viewed to be like a pauper
before a great tycoon. Suppose there is a pauper who has no clothes
to wear and feeds himself by scavenging for scraps of food from piles
of garbage. Not only does he consider himself to be a sinner, but
other wealthy people also consider him to be a sinner. They presume,
‘He must have committed many sins; that is why he has no food or
clothes.’ Similarly, after becoming a renunciant, a person who
collects nice clothes and other pleasant objects with a strong craving
for them, but does not have affection for dharma, gnãn, vairãgya and
bhakti is considered by the great Ekãntik Sant to be a sinner just like
the pauper. Why? Since he is a sinner, he does not have love for
dharma, gnãn, vairãgya and bhakti; instead, he has affection for
objects other than God.

3

“However, for a true renunciant both dirt and gold are equal.
Moreover, a renunciant never makes distinctions by thinking, ‘This
object is pleasant, and this object is unpleasant.’ He never has such
an understanding; instead, he has affection only towards God. Only
such a person is a true renunciant.”
The Vachanãmrut

60

|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-36 || 36 ||

Gadhadã I-37
Attachment to One’s Native Place; Eleven Honours
1

On Posh vadi 14, Samvat 1876 [14 January 1820], Shriji
Mahãrãj was sitting facing west on a large, decorated cot under the
neem tree in front of the mandir of Shri Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã
Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was wearing a white pãgh, from
which hung a tassel of yellow flowers. Bunches of white flowers had
also been placed upon both of His ears, and a garland of yellow and
white flowers adorned His neck. He was wearing a white khes and
had covered Himself with a white cotton cloth. At that time, an
assembly of munis as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “One who lacks proper
understanding cannot abandon his feelings of affection for his
birthplace even though he has renounced the world.” So saying, He
showed everyone the scar on His thigh where He had been hurt by
the stump of a tree during His childhood. Shriji Mahãrãj then
continued, “Whenever I see this scar, that tree and that lake
immediately spring to mind. So you see, it is extremely difficult to
forget one’s birthplace and relatives from within. Now I would like
those amongst you who do not remember their birthplace and bodily
relations to confess. For those who do not speak up out of shame,
confess in the holy name of Shri Narnãrãyan.”

3
4

All the munis subsequently revealed their own situation.
After listening to them, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “If one believes
oneself to be the ãtmã, where is the birthplace of that ãtmã? Who
are the relatives of that ãtmã? Of what gender is that ãtmã?
Moreover, if you wish to maintain relationships with your relatives,
then you should also maintain relationships with all of the relatives
that you have had throughout your previous lives in the cycle of 8.4
million life forms3. Furthermore, if one wishes for the liberation of
one’s relatives, then one should wish the same for all. However, just
as upon beginning this human life the parents of the previous 8.4
million life forms have all been forgotten due to ignorance, similarly
the parents of this human body should be forgotten through
knowledge.
The Vachanãmrut

61

5

“As for Me, I have no affection towards any of My relatives.
Moreover, a person may be serving Me, but if there is no bhakti for
God in his heart, I cannot develop a liking for him – even if I try.
Even if he is as virtuous as Nãradji, if he lacks bhakti for God, I do
not like him.

6

“On the other hand, there is a person who has bhakti for God in
his heart. He understands that the manner in which the incarnate
form of God resides on this earth, and the manner in which the
devotees of God remain in the vicinity of God is exactly how they
remain when ãtyantik-pralay occurs. He also understands that God
and His devotees eternally possess a form; but never does he
understand them to be formless, regardless of any Vedãnta scripture
he may hear. Furthermore, he realises that there is no other all-doer
in this world besides that God, and he also realises that without God,
even a dry leaf cannot be stirred.

7

“A person with such firm conviction that God has a form, even if
he is an ordinary person, is still dear to Me [1]i . Kãl [2], karma [3]
and mãyã [4] are unable to administer their power over him. In fact,
God Himself imparts any punishment that he is to receive, but no
one else has any authority over him. On the other hand, I have no
respect for a person without such a conviction, even if he happens to
have the virtues of renunciation and vairãgya. However, a person
with firm faith in God in his heart never loses his conviction that
God has a form; nor does he ever understand God to be formless like
a mass of light, regardless of how many scriptures he may hear or
the company he may keep.
A Sant with such a conviction is so
highly respected by Me that even I place the dust of his feet on My
head [5]. In My mind, I am afraid of harming him [6], and I also
long to have his darshan [7].

8

“A person without such a conviction attempts to attain liberation
using the strength of his own spiritual endeavours, but he does not
strive for it by relying on the grace of God. Such a senseless person
is as foolish as someone wishing to cross the ocean without the aid of
a ship, by his own efforts. Conversely, one who wishes for liberation

i

These numbers indicate the 11 honours bestowed upon the Satpurush, as
indicated in the title.

The Vachanãmrut

62

through the grace of God is wise [8], like one who wishes to cross the
ocean with the help of a ship.
9

“After leaving their body, all those with such knowledge of God’s
form attain a form of chaitanya in the abode of God and forever
remain in His service in His presence [9]. But if a person has
endeavoured without having such a conviction, then he will go to
dwell in the realms of other deities.

10

“In fact, the darshan of such a true Bhakta of God is equivalent
to the darshan of God Himself [10]. He is so great that his darshan
alone can redeem countless wretched jivas [11].”

11

Having delivered this discourse, Shriji Mahãrãj then requested,
“Now please sing a devotional song.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-37 || 37 ||

Gadhadã I-38
A Merchant’s Balance Sheet
1

On the evening of Mahã sudi 1, Samvat 1876 [16 January 1820],
Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting on a small mattress which had been
placed on the veranda outside the stables in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr
in Gadhadã. He was wearing a white khes and had tied a white, redbordered feto around His head. He was also wearing a richly
embroidered angarkhu and had covered Himself with a thick, white
cotton cloth. At that time, an assembly of sãdhus as well as devotees
from various places had gathered before Him.

2

After glancing at all of the devotees, Shriji Mahãrãj thought for
a considerable length of time and said, “Please listen, I have
something to say.” He then continued, “From the time a satsangi
enters the Satsang fellowship, he should examine his mind by
thinking, ‘In the first year, my mind was like this; then it was like
this. Previously, I had this much desire for God and this much
desire for the world.’ In this manner, he should repeatedly reflect on
this yearly total of desires and always strive to gradually, yet
constantly eradicate all worldly desires that remain in his mind. If,
however, he does not introspect in this manner and allows those
desires to accumulate, then they will never be overcome. Consider,
for example, the analogy of opening an account with a merchant. If
one settles one’s debts to him regularly on a monthly basis, then it
The Vachanãmrut

63

would not be difficult to repay the debt. But if one waits to pay until
the end of the year, it would be extremely difficult to settle the
account. Likewise, one should introspect constantly.
3

”In reality, the mind is saturated with desires for the world.
But, in the manner in which sesame seeds are imbued with scent by
padding them between alternating layers of flowers, the mind should
be similarly saturated with flowers in the form of the constant
remembrance of God’s divine actions and incidents – coupled with an
understanding of His greatness. The mind should constantly be
entangled in a web in the form of these divine actions and incidents of
God, and thoughts of God should be constantly conceived in the mind.
As one thought subsides, another thought should be conceived. As
the second subsides, a third should be conceived. In this manner, the
mind should not be left idle.” Saying this, Shriji Mahãrãj narrated
the example of the ghost in detail.

4

Thereafter, He continued, “Even if one begins to recall the divine
incidents, discourses and darshan of God of just one day in this
manner, there would be no end to them. If that is so, then there
would certainly be no end to them for one who has passed ten to
fifteen years in Satsang.

5

“These divine actions and incidents should be recalled in the
following manner: ‘Mahãrãj and the paramhansas held an assembly
in this village, in this manner; puja was offered to Mahãrãj in this
manner; and discourses took place in this manner, etc.’ Those divine
incidents of God should be recalled over and over again. Moreover,
for one who does not understand much, this is certainly the best
method. In fact, there is no other method like it.

6

“Then you may say, ‘We wish to take very little food and wish to
observe many fasts.’ But I do not stress those methods. One should
abide by those methods as best as one can according to one’s given
niyams. But what is truly to be done is what I have just described to
you.”

7

Thereafter, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “I believe that the mind should
be free of worldly desires. No matter how much pravrutti a person
may do physically, if his mind is pure, then he cannot be
seriously harmed – even though outwardly, in society, a person
engaged in pravrutti appears to be discreditable. On the other hand,
if a person’s mind is full of worldly desires and he superficially
behaves as if he is practising nivrutti, then he may appear
The Vachanãmrut

64

respectable in society, but his jiva will suffer severely. Why?
Because at the time of death, it is those thoughts that are in one’s
mind that spring forth, just like the fawn sprang forth in Bharatji’s
mind during his last moments. As a result, he became a deer in his
next life, even though he had originally renounced a kingdom and
Rushabhdev Bhagwãn was his father. Therefore, to remain free of
worldly desires mentally is My principle. By observing fasts, the
mind does become weak along with the body, but when the body
becomes robust again, the mind becomes robust as well. Therefore,
mental renunciation is required along with physical renunciation. In
fact, one whose mind entertains thoughts of God but not thoughts
relating to the world should be considered eminent in our Satsang
fellowship. Conversely, those who do not do this, are inferior.
8

“Furthermore, a householder should engage in worldly activities
physically, but mentally – just like the renunciant – he should also
remain free of worldly desires and should contemplate on God. Also,
he should engage in social activities according to the command of
God. Moreover, if mental renunciation is not genuine renunciation,
then what about King Janak, whose mind was like that of a great
yogi master despite ruling a kingdom? Therefore, only renunciation
which is cultivated mentally is appropriate.”

9

Shriji Mahãrãj then explained, “If impure thoughts arise in one’s
mind, one should reveal them.
But, as the saying goes,
‘Only a dog would lick a dog’s face’; or ‘Á’˝fiı CÎıfl ’fl˘HÎ˘ ÁÎ’, ‹¬ «ÎÀÌfiı
‰Ï‚›˘ ±Î’’i; or when a married woman goes to a widow, the widow
says, ‘Come, lady. May you also become like me’ – similarly, to
reveal one’s thoughts to a person who also experiences impure
thoughts like oneself is like the aforesaid examples. To whom, then,
should one reveal one’s impure thoughts? Well, one should reveal
them to a person who is so strong-willed that no impure thoughts
relating to the world arise in his mind. However, there may be many
who do not experience such thoughts. So, out of those, one should
reveal one’s impure thoughts to a person who denounces those
i Sarpne gher parono sãp, mukh chãtine valiyo ãp.

When a snake becomes a guest to another snake, as the host is also a snake and
will have nothing to offer, the guest-snake’s reward will be nothing more than
an opportunity to lick the host’s face.

The Vachanãmrut

65

thoughts after listening to them and who continues to denounce them
in all of one’s activities, i.e., while eating, drinking, sitting, standing,
etc. – until they are eradicated from one’s mind. Moreover, that
person should have the same determination to eradicate others’
impure thoughts as he has to remove his own. One should reveal
one’s impure thoughts to such a person. But if the person to whom
one reveals one’s impure thoughts does not counsel in this manner
and is himself careless, then what can one gain from him?
Therefore, after revealing one’s impure thoughts in this way and
eradicating them, one should continuously harbour thoughts only of
God and become free from all desires for the pleasures of the world.”
10

Thereafter, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “What are the characteristics of
observing a fast on the day of Ekãdashi? Well, the ten indriyas and
the mind, the eleventh, should be withdrawn from their respective
vishays and attached to God. That is considered as having observed
Ekãdashi. In fact, devotees of God should engage in this observance
continuously. In comparison, if a person whose mind is not free from
worldly desires in this way engages in observances and austerities
physically, he does not benefit very much. Therefore, observing his
own dharma and understanding God’s greatness, a devotee of God
should maintain a constant effort to free his mind of worldly desires.”

11

Shriji Mahãrãj then explained, “A true renunciant is one whose
mind never entertains a desire for objects that he has already
renounced. Just as one harbours no desire for faeces once they have
been excreted, similarly, no desire arises for renounced objects; thus
the related verse which Nãradji narrated to Shukji: à‘ ÿ¡ œ◊¸◊œ◊Z

ø...H’i. The essence of that verse is: ‘Renouncing all objects except

the ãtmã, one should behave only as the ãtmã and worship God.’
Such a person can be called a perfect renunciant. Furthermore,
householder devotees should behave in the manner of King Janak,
who said, ‘Although my city of Mithilã is burning, nothing of mine is
burning.’ Thus the verse: ‘Á◊ÁÕ‹ÊÿÊ¢ ¬˝ŒË#ÊÿÊ¢ Ÿ ◊ ŒsÔÁÃ Á∑¢§øŸH’ii . A
householder devotee with this type of understanding, even though he
i Tyaja dharmam-adharmam cha…||

Mahãbhãrat: Shãnti-parva, Moksh-dharma 33.40
ii Mithilãyãm pradeeptãyãm na me dahyati kinchana||

Mahãbhãrat: Shãnti-parva, Moksh-dharma 18.40

The Vachanãmrut

66

may possess a house, is a true devotee. One who is not such a
renunciant or such a householder is called a pseudo-devotee, whereas
one who does behave as described above should be known as an
ekãntik bhakta.”
12

Thereafter, Motã Ãtmãnand Swãmi asked Shriji Mahãrãj,
“What are the characteristics of the jivãtmã, which is distinct from
the body, the indriyas, the antahkaran and their presiding deities?”

13

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “I shall answer that question in brief.
The jiva is the speaker that elaborates on the nature of the body, the
indriyas, etc., and explains their natures separately to the listener.
That speaker also endorses the body, indriyas, etc.; it is the knower
and is distinct from all of the above – that is called the jiva. Also, the
listener, which understands the forms of the body, indriyas, etc., as
being distinct, which endorses them, which knows them and which is
distinct from them all is also known as the jiva itself. This is the
method of understanding the nature of the jiva.” Shriji Mahãrãj
spoke in this manner.
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-38 || 38 ||

Gadhadã I-39
Those Possessing the Nirvikalp or Savikalp State
1

On Mahã sudi 3, Samvat 1876 [18 January 1820], Shriji
Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot on the platform under
the neem tree in front of the mandir of Shri Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã
Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was wearing a white khes and
had covered Himself with a white cotton cloth. He had also tied a
white pãgh around His head, from which tassels of yellow flowers
were dangling. Bunches of white and yellow flowers had been placed
upon His ears, and He was also wearing garlands of yellow flowers
around His neck. At that time, an assembly of munis as well as
devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Shriji Mahãrãj then asked a question to a Vedãnti Brãhmin who
was sitting in the assembly, “You claim that in reality only Brahma
exists. Furthermore, you say that with the exception of that
Brahma, jivas, ishwars, mãyã, the world, the Vedas, the Shãstras
and the Purãns are all illusory. I can neither understand this
concept of yours, nor can I accept it. Therefore, please answer what I
The Vachanãmrut

67

ask you, and do so by citing only the Vedas, the Shãstras, the
Purãns, the Smrutis or the Itihãs scriptures. If, however, you reply
quoting the words of some inauthentic scripture, then I will not
accept your answer. But, since I have absolute faith in the words of
Vyãsji, I will be able to accept your reply if you reply quoting his
words.”
3

The Vedãnti then attempted to reply using various arguments,
but because Shriji Mahãrãj raised doubts, the question remained
unanswered.

4

Thereupon, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Please listen as I answer that
question Myself. There are two different states of those who have
become muktas by worshipping God. For example, a person standing
atop Mount Meru sees everything in the vicinity of Meru distinctly –
the other mountains, trees, as well as the ground that supports the
mountains and the trees. Similarly, those enlightened muktas who
have attained savikalp samãdhi see jivas, ishwars, mãyã, and their
supporter, Brahma, as being distinct from each other. A person
standing atop Mount Lokãlok, however, sees everything in the
vicinity of Mount Lokãlok – the other mountains and trees, etc. – as
being one with the ground, but he does not see them as being
distinct. Similarly, those great muktas who have attained nirvikalp
samãdhi see jivas, ishwars and mãyã as being one with Brahma –
but they do not see them as distinct entities.

5

“In this way, there are two differing states of muktas, and it is
due to their differing states that everything is viewed as being either
satya or asatya. The words of those who have attained the savikalp
state are noted in the Vedas, the Shãstras, the Purãns, etc., and they
describe all of those entities as being satya. However, the words of
those who have attained the nirvikalp state describe all of those
entities as being asatya. In reality, however, they are not asatya.
They are only described as being asatya because they cannot be seen
due to the influence of the nirvikalp state.

6

“For example, there is no night for a person sitting in the chariot
of Surya; but for those on earth, there is both day and night.
Similarly, from the viewpoint of a person who has attained the
nirvikalp state, all of those things do not exist, whereas according to
others, they do exist. So, if one interprets ‘Brahma’ in this manner,
then there will never be any contextual inconsistencies in the
statements of the scriptures; but if one does not, then inconsistencies
The Vachanãmrut

68

will arise. Furthermore, if a person, without having understood
these inconsistencies and without having attained that nirvikalp
state, relying solely on words learned from the scriptures, propound
the existence of Brahma alone, claiming that the guru, the disciple,
jivas, ishwars, mãyã, the world, the Vedas, the Purãns, the Shãstras
are all imaginary, then he is extremely foolish. Ultimately, such a
person will be consigned to narak.”
7

Having answered the question, Shriji Mahãrãj ended by asking
the Brãhmin, “Now, if you have any doubts in what I have just said,
please say so.”

8

Thereupon the Vedãnti Brãhmin replied, “O Mahãrãj, O Lord, O
Swãmi! You are God, and You have manifested for the liberation of
the entire world. The explanation You have given is of course
precise. There is no room for any doubt whatsoever.” So saying, he
became extremely pleased, and forsaking his misconceptions, he
became a disciple of Shriji Mahãrãj.
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-39 || 39 ||

Gadhadã I-40
Savikalp and Nirvikalp Samãdhi
1

In the early hours of Mahã sudi 4, Samvat 1876 [19 January
1820], Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot on the
platform under the neem tree in front of the mandir of Shri
Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was
wearing a white khes and had covered Himself with a white cotton
cloth. He had tied a white pãgh around His head, from which hung a
tassel of yellow flowers. Also, He was wearing a garland of yellow
flowers around His neck. At that time, an assembly of munis as well
as devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Muktãnand Swãmi asked Shriji Mahãrãj, “Mahãrãj,
what is savikalp samãdhi, and what is nirvikalp samãdhi?”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj answered, “If a person who has become engrossed
in the form of God does not have any impure desires, but does have
some pure desires – for example, ‘I wish to become like Nãrad, the
Sanakãdik and Shukji,’ or ‘I wish to go to the hermitage of
Narnãrãyan and stay with the munis there to perform austerities,’ or
‘I wish to go to Shwetdwip and become like a mukta of Shwetdwip by
The Vachanãmrut

69

performing austerities’ – then such a person is said to be in savikalp
samãdhi. On the other hand, one who does not entertain such
thoughts and having attained the attributes of Aksharbrahma,
remains engrossed only in the form of God, is said to be in nirvikalp
samãdhi.”
4

5

Thereafter, Muktãnand Swãmi asked again, “Mahãrãj, what is
the difference between bhakti and upãsanã?”
Shriji Mahãrãj replied,
“üÊfláÊ¢ ∑§ËÃ¸Ÿ¢ ÁflcáÊÙ— S◊⁄UáÊ¢ ¬ÊŒ‚flŸ◊˜–

•ø¸Ÿ¢ flãŒŸ¢ ŒÊSÿ¢ ‚Åÿ◊Êà◊ÁŸflŒŸ◊˜H i
To worship God in these nine ways is known as bhakti.
6

“Upãsanã can be defined as having a firm conviction that God
eternally possesses a form. Even if a person becomes brahmarup,
that conviction would never disappear. Moreover, even if he happens
to listen to scriptures propounding the view that God is formless, he
would still understand God to always have a form. Regardless of
what is mentioned in the scriptures, he would only propound that
God has a form, never allowing his own upãsanã to be refuted. One
who has such a firm understanding is considered to possess
upãsanã.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-40 || 40 ||

i Shravanam keertanam vishnoho smaranam pãda-sevanam|

Archanam vandanam dãsyam sakhyam-ãtmanivedanam||
This verse lists the nine ways of offering bhakti to God: (1) shravan – listening to
spiritual discourses or devotional songs related to God; (2) keertan – singing or
talking about God; (3) smaran – remembering God; (4) pãda-sevan – serving
God’s holy feet; (5) archan – anointing God with sandalwood paste, etc.;
(6) vandan – bowing before God; (7) dãsya – behaving as a servant of God;
(8) sakhya – behaving as a friend of God; (9) ãtmanivedan – unconditionally
offering oneself and all of one’s belongings to God with absolute submission.
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 7.5.23

The Vachanãmrut

70

Gadhadã I-41
“Eko’ham Bahu Syãm”
1

On the evening of Mahã sudi 5, Samvat 1876 [20 January 1820],
Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot on the platform
under the neem tree near the mandir of Shri Vãsudevnãrãyan in
Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in
white clothes. He was also adorned with garlands of yellow flowers.
Bunches of yellow flowers had been placed upon His ears, and tassels
of yellow flowers were dangling from His pãgh. At that time, an
assembly of munis as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him.

2

Then Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Please engage in a question-answer
dialogue.”

3

Thereupon Nrusinhãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, many
pundits and Vedãntis in the world interpret the Vedic verse ‘∞∑§Ù˘„¢

’„ÈU SÿÊ¢ ¬˝¡Êÿÿ’i to mean: ‘The one God present at the time of
dissolution Himself takes the form of all jivas and ishwars by His
own will.’ But this belief can only be accepted by someone who is a
fool. We have accepted Your refuge, so this belief does not make
sense in our minds. Our understanding is that God is indivisible,
and that He does not divide and assume the forms of various jivas
and ishwars. Therefore, we can only fully understand the meaning of
this verse if You explain it to us.”
4

Shriji Mahãrãj then explained, “The meaning of that Vedic verse
is not as they interpret it to be. In fact, it has a different meaning
altogether. In the prose portion of the Vedstuti, it is stated:

Sfl∑Î§ÃÁflÁøòÊÿÙÁŸ·È Áfl‡ÊÁÛÊfl „UÃÈÃÿÊ
Ã⁄UÃ◊Ãp∑§ÊSSÿŸ‹flÃ˜ Sfl∑Î§ÃÊŸÈ∑Î§ÁÃ—– ii

i Eko’ham bahu syãm prajãyeya

Chhãndogya Upanishad: 6.2.3
ii Svakruta-vichitra-yonishu vishanniva hetutayã

Taratamatash-chakãssyanalavat svakrutãnukrutihi|
Shrimad-Bhãgwat: 10.87.19

The Vachanãmrut

71

This means: ‘Purushottam Bhagwãn creates and enters the various
types of life forms as their cause and as their antaryãmi, and He
inspires them to a greater or lesser degree.’
5

“More specifically, at the time of creation, Purushottam
Bhagwãn – who transcends even Akshar – inspires Akshar. As a
result, Purush manifests from Akshar. After entering Akshar,
Purushottam enters Purush, and in the form of Purush, inspires
Prakruti. In this way, as Purushottam successively entered the
various entities, the activities of creation took place. Thereafter,
Pradhãn-Purushes were produced from Prakruti-Purush. From
Pradhãn-Purush, mahattattva was produced. From mahattattva,
the three types of ahamkãr were produced. From ahamkãr, the
bhuts, the vishays, the indriyas, the antahkarans and their presiding
deities were produced. From those, Virãt-Purush was produced.
From the lotus extending from his naval, Brahmã was produced.
From that Brahmã, Marichi and other prajãpatis were produced.
From them, Kashyap and other prajãpatis were produced. From
them, Indra and other deities, the demons, and all of the mobile and
immobile creation were produced.

6

“Purushottam Bhagwãn enters and dwells in all of the above as
their cause and antaryãmi. However, He does not manifest in
Prakruti-Purush to the extent He manifests in Akshar; and He does
not manifest in Pradhãn-Purush to the extent that He manifests in
Prakruti-Purush; and He does not manifest in mahattattva and the
rest of the 24 elements2 to the extent that He manifests in PradhãnPurush; and He does not manifest in Virãt-Purush to the extent that
He manifests in the 24 elements; and He does not manifest in
Brahmã to the extent that He manifests in Virãt-Purush; and He
does not manifest in Marichi and others to the extent that He
manifests in Brahmã; and He does not manifest in Kashyap to the
extent that He manifests in Marichi and others; and He does not
manifest in Indra and the other deities to the extent that He
manifests in Kashyap; and He does not manifest in human beings to
the extent that He manifests in Indra and the other deities; and He
does not manifest in animals to the extent that He manifests in
human beings. In this manner, Purushottam Bhagwãn resides in
all – to a greater or lesser degree – as their cause and antaryãmi.

7

“For example, fire is latent within wood. Large fire resides in
large pieces of wood, long fire resides in a long piece of wood, and
The Vachanãmrut

72

warped fire resides in a warped piece of wood. In a similar way,
Purushottam Bhagwãn manifests in various entities with various
degrees of power according to the task to be accomplished through
that entity.
8

“Purushottam Bhagwãn also resides in Akshar, PrakrutiPurush and others as their antaryãmi. However, because of the
difference in the capacities of those entities, there is a difference in
their power. So, in fact, there is only one Purushottam Bhagwãn,
and it is He who enters all and resides in them as antaryãmi. But,
He does not Himself become the jivas and ishwars by assuming
many forms. This is how that Vedic verse should be interpreted.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-41 || 41 ||

Gadhadã I-42
The Observance of the Moral Do’s and Don’ts
1

On Mahã sudi 6, Samvat 1876 [21 January 1820], Shriji
Mahãrãj was sitting facing west on a large, decorated cot on the
platform under the neem tree in front of the mandir of Shri
Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He had tied
a white pãgh around His head. He had also covered Himself with a
white cotton cloth and was wearing a white khes. Bunches of yellow
flowers had been placed upon both of His ears. At that time, an
assembly of munis as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him.

2

Also seated in the assembly were some Vedãnti Brãhmins.
Seeing them, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Those who study or listen to the
Vedãnta scriptures claim, ‘The moral do’s and don’ts are false; swarg
and narak, which are attained by observing them are also false; the
disciples who attain them are false; and the guru is false as well.
Brahma pervades everything and it alone is satya.’ But with what
understanding do those who speak in this manner propound this?

3

“In actual fact, the ãchãrya of all Vedãntis, Shankarãchãrya,
had his own disciples keep a staff and a gourd. He also enforced,
‘One should recite the Bhagwad Gitã and the Vishnu-sahasranãm;
one should perform puja of Vishnu; those who are young should bow
down to those who are senior in age; and one should beg for alms only
from the house of a pious and pure Brãhmin.’
So, because
The Vachanãmrut

73

Shankarãchãrya propounded the observance of various moral do’s
and don’ts in this way, can you claim that he did not have complete
gnãn? Have those who claim to have recently attained gnãn and
have falsified the observance of these do’s and don’ts become greater
than Shankarãchãrya? Actually, it seems as if they are speaking out
of absolute foolishness.
4

“In reality, those moral do’s and don’ts that have been falsified in
the scriptures can be understood through the following example: If a
large ship sets out to sea for a year, then neither the shoreline ahead
nor the shoreline behind can be seen. In fact, even huge mountains
on either shoreline cannot be seen, so how can trees or people possibly
be seen? Wherever one looks, only water can be seen; but besides
water, nothing else is visible. If one looks up, the enormous waves of
the ocean rising up will be seen; so even above, only water is visible.
In this situation, people sitting in the ship would claim, ‘There is
only water; nothing else exists.’ The principle behind this example is
that one who has attained a nirvikalp state in the form of Brahma
claims, ‘There is only Brahma; besides that, everything else, such as
jivas, ishwars, mãyã, etc., is false.’ Hearing words written in the
scriptures supporting this view, a person who has not even attained
that state claims all moral do’s and don’ts to be false. On the one
hand, he cares for his wife, attends to his children, and meticulously
performs all worldly activities, believing them to be real; yet, on the
other hand, he falsifies these do’s and don’ts which have been
prescribed by the scriptures. Those who preach such gnãn in this
world should be known as extremely wretched and nãstiks.

5

“After all, it was because of the apprehension that such a nãstik
nature may creep into people’s hearts that Shankarãchãrya composed
‘÷¡ ªÙÁflãŒ¢ ÷¡ ªÙÁflãŒ¢ ªÙÁflãŒ¢ ÷¡ ◊Í…U◊Ã– ’i and many other verses in
praise of Vishnu. He also composed several verses extolling Shivji,
Ganapati, Surya and many other deities. After hearing these verses,
all of the deities appear to be satya. It was with this intention in
mind that Shankarãchãrya composed verses in praise of all these
deities. Despite this, however, unorthodox scholars of today falsify
i Bhaja govindam bhaja govindam govindam bhaja moodha-mate|

O Fool! Worship God; worship God; worship God.
Charpat-panjari

The Vachanãmrut

74

them. In addition, they claim, ‘Regardless of how severe a sin a
person with gnãn may commit, it would not affect him.’ But they
say this out of foolishness.
6

“Besides, consider this: Of all those who have renounced and
become paramhansas, Jadbharat is the best. In fact, the story of
Jadbharat has been noted in each of the Purãns and all the Vedãnta
scriptures. That great Jadbharat was also the son of Rushabhdev
Bhagwãn in his previous life. Renouncing his kingdom, he went to
live in the forest. There, he developed affection for a deer; although
that was merely out of compassion, this mistake caused him to be
reborn as a deer. Like the deer, then, he attained a form with four
legs, a short tail and small horns on his head.

7

“In comparison, the gopis of Vraj were attached to Paramãtmã
Shri Krishna Bhagwãn out of lust. Despite this, they were still able
to overcome God’s mãyã and attain the nirgun Akshardhãm of God
after becoming gunãtit. The reason for this was that Shri Krishna
Bhagwãn himself was Purushottam; he was gunãtit and his form
was divine. So, because the gopis developed affection for him, either
knowingly or unknowingly, they became gunãtit as well; whereas
Bharatji became a deer, even though he had developed affection for
the deer out of compassion. Therefore, no matter how great one may
be, worldly influence only leads to harm. Conversely, regardless of
how grave a sinner a person may be, if he maintains profound
association with God – who is satya – then that person also becomes
absolutely pure and attains liberation. Of course, if Shri Krishna
Bhagwãn was not gunãtit himself, then his devotees, the gopis,
would not have attained the gunãtit state. But because they did
attain the gunãtit state, Shri Krishna Bhagwãn was most certainly
flawless, gunãtit and divine.

8

“Vedãntis also claim, ‘Everything is pervaded by Brahma.’ But
just as the gopis developed affection for Shri Krishna, similarly, all
women develop affection for their husbands, and all men develop
affection for their wives. But they do not attain what the gopis
attained; instead, they attain dismal narak.
Therefore, the
prescribed moral do’s and don’ts are indeed true, not false.
Whosoever falsifies them will be consigned to narak.”

9

Having said this, Shriji Mahãrãj bid ‘Jai Sachchidãnand’ to the
assembly and returned to His residence.
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-42 || 42 ||
The Vachanãmrut

75

Gadhadã I-43
The Four Types of Liberation
1

On the evening of Mahã sudi 7, Samvat 1876 [22 January 1820],
Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot on the veranda
outside the east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.
He had tied a white pãgh around His head. He had covered Himself
with a white cotton cloth and was wearing a white khes as well.
Tassels of yellow flowers were dangling from His pãgh, and garlands
of yellow flowers adorned His neck. Also, bunches of yellow flowers
had been placed upon both of His ears. At that time, an assembly of
munis as well as devotees from various places had gathered before
Him.

2

Looking at all of the devotees with a compassionate gaze, Shriji
Mahãrãj said, “I wish to ask a question, so please listen.” He then
began, “The Shrimad Bhãgwat Purãn states: ‘Those who are devotees
of God do not desire any of the four types of liberation.’ Other great
devotees of God also say, ‘Devotees of God do not wish for the four
types of liberation.’ What are the four types of liberation? Well, the
first is to reside in the realm of God; the second is to stay near God;
the third is to assume a form similar to that of God; and the fourth is
to attain divine powers similar to God’s powers. These are the four
types of liberation. A devotee of God does not wish for any of these; he
wishes only to serve God. Now, My question is, ‘Why does that
devotee not wish for the four types of liberation?’ Please answer
according to your ability.”

3

All of the paramhansas attempted to answer the question but
were unable to do so satisfactorily.

4

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Here, I shall answer the
question. One who maintains a desire for those four types of
liberation after becoming a devotee of God is known as a ‘sakãm
devotee’. In contrast, one who has no desires regarding the four types
of liberation and who only desires to serve God is known as a
‘nishkãm devotee’. In fact, the Shrimad Bhãgwat states:

The Vachanãmrut

76

◊à‚flÿÊ ¬˝ÃËÃ¢ ø ‚Ê‹ÙÄÿÊÁŒøÃÈCÔUÿ◊˜–
Ÿë¿UÁãÃ ‚flÿÊ ¬ÍáÊÊ¸— ∑È§ÃÙ˘ãÿÃ˜ ∑§Ê‹Áflå‹ÈÃ◊˜H i
‚Ê‹ÙÄÿ‚ÊÁCÔ¸U‚Ê◊Ëåÿ‚ÊM§åÿÒ∑§àfl◊åÿÈÃ–
ŒËÿ◊ÊŸ¢ Ÿ ªÎˆÔUÁãÃ ÁflŸÊ ◊à‚flŸ¢ ¡ŸÊ—H ii
This means that a ‘nishkãm devotee’ of God does not wish for the four
types of liberation if service, i.e., attending to God, is not included
therein; he wishes only to serve God. In turn, God keeps him in His
own service. God also insistingly grants such a devotee His divine
powers and bliss, even though the devotee does not wish for them.
Kapildev Bhagwãn has also said:

i Mat-sevayã prateetam cha sãlokyãdi-chatushtayam|

Nechchhanti sevayã poornãhã kuto’nyat-kãlaviplutam||
If those who are [only] fulfilled by serving me do not desire the four [types of
liberation], such as a place in my abode, etc. – which are attained by serving me –
then why would they desire anything that is ultimately perishable?
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 9.4.67
ii Sãlokya-sãrshti-sãmeepya-sãrupyaikatvam-apyuta|

Deeyamãnam na gruhnanti vinã mat-sevanam janãhã||
Even if granted a place in my abode, powers similar to mine, my vicinity, a form
similar to mine or oneness with me [i.e. qualities similar to me], ‘[nishkãm]
devotees’ would not accept them without my service.
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 3.29.13
Although the second verse mentions five types of liberation, this does not
contradict the earlier verse – which does not mention ‘oneness with me’ – since
there are considered to be two ‘sets’ of liberation; oneness with God, and a
further four types of liberation. A person who attains oneness with God, i.e.
qualities similar to those of God, will naturally attain the other four types of
liberation. On the other hand, the other four types of liberation alone are for
those who have not attained such oneness with God.

The Vachanãmrut

77

•ÕÙ Áfl÷ÍÁÃ¢ ◊◊ ◊ÊÿÊÁflŸSÃÊ◊ÒEÿ¸◊CÔUÊ¢ª◊ŸÈ¬˝flÎ?Ê◊˜–
ÁüÊÿ¢ ÷ÊªflÃË¥ flÊ˘S¬Î„ÿUÁãÃ ÷º˝Ê¢ ¬⁄USÿ ◊ Ã˘oAÈflÃ ÃÈ ‹Ù∑§H i
5

“It is only such a ‘nishkãm devotee’ who has been referred to as
a devotee with gnãn by Krishna Bhagwãn in the Gitã. A ‘sakãm
devotee’, on the other hand, has been referred to as materialistic.
Therefore, a devotee should not wish for anything except the service
of God. After all, wishing for anything other than the service of God
is considered to be a deficiency in that devotee. If one does have such
a deficiency, it should be overcome by profound association with the
desireless Ekãntik Bhakta of God.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-43 || 43 ||

Gadhadã I-44
A Red-hot Branding Iron; A Dagli
1

On the morning of Mahã sudi 8, Samvat 1876 [23 January
1820], Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting facing west on a large, decorated
cot on the platform under the neem tree in front of the mandir of
Shri Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He
was wearing a white khes and had covered Himself with a white
cotton cloth. Also, He had tied a white pãgh around His head and
had tied a bokãni with one end of the pãgh. A garland of white
flowers decorated the pãgh as well. At that time, an assembly of
munis as well as devotees from various places had gathered before
Him.

2

Addressing the assembly, Shriji Mahãrãj asked, “What is the
characteristic of having affection towards God?”
i

Atho
vibhootim
mama
mãyã-vinas-tãm-aishvaryam-ashtãngamanupravruttam| Shriyam bhãgavateem vã’spruhayanti bhadrãm parasya me
te’shnuvate tu loke||
Even though my [‘nishkãm devotees’] have no wish for the material opulence of
the realms up to and including the realm of Brahmã, for the eight yogic
powers15, or for the auspicious wealth of God, they still enjoy [i.e. attain] all
these in my – the supreme being’s – abode.
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 3.25.37

The Vachanãmrut

78

3

Thereupon Brahmãnand Swãmi attempted to describe the
characteristic of affection but was unable to do so satisfactorily.

4

Hearing his reply, Shriji Mahãrãj commented, “You have not
even come close to describing affection. You say it is remaining
detached from the body and the brahmãnd, but that is not the
characteristic of affection; rather, it is the characteristic of vairãgya.
In actual fact, affection is constantly remembering God’s form. That
is called affection.

5

“A devotee with such total affection for God never has any
thoughts other than those of God. The extent to which he harbours
desires other than those of God is the extent to which he lacks in his
affection. If, whether knowingly or unknowingly, some thought other
than remembering God’s form were to arise in a person who has true
affection for God, it would be as distressful for him as someone
throwing a handful of pebbles and sand into a sumptuous meal he is
eating; or as painful as being branded on his forehead by a red-hot
branding iron. One who feels this way should be known to have love
for God. So now, if all of you examine your hearts, you will realise
how much love you have for God.”

6

Brahmãnand Swãmi then asked, “By what means can one
develop such intense love for God?”

7

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “Only by keeping profound association
with the Satpurush can one develop intense love for God.”

8

At this point, Somlã Khãchar questioned, “But we are intensely
engaged in such profound association, yet why does such intense love
not develop?”

9

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “It is true that you engage yourselves
in such profound association, but as well as associating with Me, you
also associate with the world. As a result, intense love for God does
not develop.”

10

Thereafter, Vãlo Dhruv, a Brãhmin from Vaso, asked a question:
“Mahãrãj, how can the feelings of I-ness and my-ness towards one’s
body and its relations be eradicated?”

11

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “The jiva has a misconception in that it
does not believe itself to be the jivãtmã, i.e., distinct from the body;
instead, it believes itself to be the body. To illustrate how the body
clings to the jivãtmã, consider a person who wears a dagli after
having it sewn by a tailor. That person then begins to believe, ‘The
The Vachanãmrut

79

tailor is my father and the tailor’s wife is my mother.’ Such a person
would be considered a fool. In the same manner, the jivãtmã is given
a dagli in the form of this body, which is born sometimes to a
Brãhmin couple; sometimes to a low-caste couple; or in any of the 8.4
million life forms3. Therefore, a person who believes the body to be
his true self and believes the parents of that body to be his own
parents is called a fool, and should be considered to be like an animal.
12

“Moreover, out of those 8.4 million life forms previously
undertaken, there is not a single mother, sister, daughter or wife
who observes the vow of fidelity any longer. So how can one who
believes such relations to be one’s true relations ever overcome the
feelings of I-ness and my-ness? Thus, without such understanding,
to eradicate attachment for one’s birthplace and native land is very
difficult indeed.

13

“Therefore, as long as a person believes the body to be his true
self, his entire understanding is totally useless; and as long as he
continues to harbour vanity of his caste or ãshram, he will never
imbibe the virtues of a sãdhu. Thus, after discarding the feelings of
I-ness and my-ness for the body and its relations, believing one’s
ãtmã to be brahmarup, and after forsaking all worldly desires, if a
person worships God while observing swadharma, he should be
known as a sãdhu. No distance remains between Purushottam
Bhagwãn and a person who has cultivated such qualities of a sãdhu.
Everything else may be possible, but to cultivate such qualities of a
sãdhu is extremely difficult. In fact, I am such a sãdhu, because I do
not have even the slightest vanity of My caste or ãshram.”

14

Shriji Mahãrãj spoke in this manner for the purpose of
enlightening His devotees, but in reality, He Himself is the manifest
form of Purushottam Nãrãyan.
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-44 || 44 ||

Gadhadã I-45
Does God Possess a Form or Is He Formless?
1

On the evening of Mahã sudi 10, Samvat 1876 [24 January
1820], Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting facing south on the platform in
front of the mandir of Shri Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s
darbãr in Gadhadã. He was wearing a white khes and had covered
The Vachanãmrut

80

Himself with a white cotton cloth. He had also tied a white pãgh
around His head. At that time, an assembly of munis as well as
devotees from various places had gathered before Him.
2

Thereupon Gopãlãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, many Vedãntis
claim that God does not possess a form. Moreover, they cite Vedic
verses that support only that belief. On the other hand, devotees of
God such as Nãrad, Shukji and the Sanakãdik claim that God does
possess a form. Of the two, who is correct?”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “Purushottam Bhagwãn eternally
possesses a form, and that form is extremely luminous. His perfect,
all-pervasive antaryãmi form – Brahmai , characterised by eternal
existence, consciousness and bliss – is actually the divine light of
Purushottam Bhagwãn, but He Himself possesses a definite form.
The Shrutis also mention: ‘That God looked towards mãyã.’ Now if
God sees, does that mean that He has only a pair of eyes and nothing
else? In reality, He does have hands and feet. This proves that He
possesses a form.

4

“Take the example of water. Its corresponding deity, Varun,
possesses a form in his own realm, while water itself is described as
formless. Also, the flames of a fire are described as formless, while
their corresponding deity, Agni, possesses a form in his realm.
Sunlight is also described as being formless, while Suryadev, who
resides in his realm, possesses a form.
Similarly, Brahma –
characterised by eternal existence, consciousness and bliss – is
formless, while Purushottam Bhagwãn possesses a form.
Furthermore, that all-pervasive, perfect Brahma, with the attributes
of eternal existence, consciousness and bliss, is the divine light of
Purushottam Bhagwãn.

5

“Someone may claim that the Shrutis propound: ‘God is allpervasive and perfect, without hands, feet, etc.’ But those Vedic
verses that refute the hands, feet, etc., of God are actually refuting
mãyik hands, feet, etc. In reality, God’s form is divine, not mãyik.
Moreover, despite the fact that Purushottam Bhagwãn’s brahmarup
light, which pervades all jivas and ishwars as their antaryãmi, is
formless, it should be considered to possess a form. This is because it
i ‘Brahma’ in this context refers to the divine light of Purushottam Bhagwãn, and

should not be understood to mean ‘Aksharbrahma’.

The Vachanãmrut

81

governs the granting of the deserved fruits of karmas to all jivas and
ishwars according to their respective karmas.
This power of
governing makes it function as if it possesses a form. Thus, that
divine light should be considered to possess a form as well. In the
same manner, Purushottam Bhagwãn always possesses a form; He is
not formless. Those who do believe Him to be formless just do not
understand.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-45 || 45 ||

Gadhadã I-46
The Creation and Destruction of Ãkãsh
1

On the evening of Mahã sudi 11, Samvat 1876 [25 January
1820], Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting facing south on the platform near
the mandir of Shri Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in
Gadhadã. He was wearing a white khes and had covered Himself
with a white cotton cloth. He had also tied a white pãgh around His
head. At that time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees from
various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon, a Vedãnti Brãhmin by the name of Mãheshwar
Bhatt asked Shriji Mahãrãj a question: “Everything is assimilated
during the state of samãdhi; but how does ãkãsh become
assimilated?”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “Please listen carefully as I explain the
characteristics of ãkãsh in detail. Ãkãsh is the name given to vacant
space. All objects that exist reside only within such space. Moreover,
ãkãsh pervades and resides within all of those objects as well. In
fact, there is not a single object in which there is no ãkãsh; even the
smallest particle of pruthvi has ãkãsh within it. In fact, if that
minute particle is split into millions and millions of pieces, ãkãsh will
exist within those pieces as well.

4

“So, when one looks from the perspective of ãkãsh, the four
bhuts, i.e., pruthvi, jal, etc., cannot be perceived; only ãkãsh can be
perceived. Everything is dependent on that ãkãsh. The three types
of bodies, sthul, sukshma and kãran, stay within ãkãsh. This
brahmãnd, as well as the causes of the brahmãnd, Prakruti and
Purush, also reside within ãkãsh. But that ãkãsh also resides within
Prakruti-Purush and their creation, the body and the brahmãnd. It
The Vachanãmrut

82

resides externally as their supporter. Therefore, this ãkãsh is never
assimilated, neither during the state of unconsciousness nor during
samãdhi.
5

“Now, someone may argue, ‘The five bhuts, i.e., ãkãsh, pruthvi,
etc., have evolved from tamogun; so how can that ãkãsh be called the
supporter of Prakruti and Purush? Also, how can it be said to
pervade them all?’ Well, the answer is that if Prakruti did not
contain ãkãsh in the form of vacant space, how could mahattattva –
which emerges from Prakruti in the way fruits, flowers, etc., emerge
from a tree, and a calf emerges from a cow’s womb – emerge at all?
Therefore, ãkãsh does reside within Prakruti.
Furthermore,
ahamkãr also emerges from mahattattva; so ãkãsh resides within
mahattattva as well. The three gunas emerge from ahamkãr, and
thus ãkãsh is also within ahamkãr. The five bhuts, i.e., ãkãsh,
pruthvi, etc., emerge from tamogun; thus, ãkãsh is within tamogun
as well. However, the ãkãsh that has evolved from tamogun is
subject to change, whereas the ãkãsh that is the support of
everything is not subject to change; it is eternal. It is this ãkãsh –
the support of all – that is known as Brahma, as Chidãkãsh.
Moreover, it is within this ãkãsh that Purush and Prakruti undergo
the states of expansion and contraction.

6

“How is this so? When Purush inspires Prakruti, then, just as
children are born to a man and woman, similarly, with Purush as
the husband and Prakruti as the wife, children in the form of
mahattattva, etc., are produced. In this manner, Prakruti takes the
form of the 24 elements2 as well as the form of the body and the
brahmãnd. This is her state of expansion. Purush pervades all
entities that evolve from that Prakruti with his powers. This is his
state of expansion.

7

“In time, when all of the entities that have evolved from
Prakruti are destroyed, and even Prakruti appears to remain
absorbed in Purush’s body, that is Prakruti’s state of contraction.
When Purush reverts within his own self at the time when all of the
entities that have evolved from Prakruti are destroyed, that is known
as Purush’s state of contraction. For example, when a tortoise
expands, all of its limbs emerge from its shell; and when it contracts,
it withdraws all of its limbs back into its shell and remains totally
motionless. The states of expansion and contraction of Prakruti and
Purush are similar.
The Vachanãmrut

83

8

“Also, it is only Purush, and not the all-supporting Chidãkãsh,
which has an anvay-vyatirek relationship with Prakruti and the
entities evolved from her. After all, how can something that is allsupporting ever be vyatirek from anything? On the contrary, it
always resides in everything.

9

“Now, this brahmãnd is surrounded on all four sides by the
Lokãlok mountains, just like a fort. Beyond the Lokãlok mountains
is Alok; beyond that are the seven barriers5; beyond that is nothing
but darkness; and beyond the darkness there is divine light,
otherwise known as Chidãkãsh. Above also, the brahmãnd extends
up to Brahmalok, above which are the seven barriers, above which
there is darkness, and above which there is again divine light,
otherwise known as Chidãkãsh. Below, too, it extends down to the
seventh pãtãl, below which are the seven barriers, below which there
is darkness, and below which there is again divine light, i.e.,
Chidãkãsh. In this way, Chidãkãsh is present on all four sides of the
brahmãnd as well as within the brahmãnd. When one’s vision
reaches the perspective of that all-supporting Chidãkãsh, it is known
as daharvidyã.
Just as akshividyã and many other types of
brahmavidyã have been described, this is also one type of
brahmavidyã.

10

“That Chidãkãsh is extremely luminous and eternal. It is
neither created nor destroyed. Whenever there is any mention of the
creation and destruction of ãkãsh, it is with reference to the ãkãsh
that has evolved from tamogun, and which is full of darkness. This
ãkãsh can be assimilated, but the all-supporting Chidãkãsh is never
assimilated. This is the answer to your question. If anyone still has
any doubts, please do ask.”

11

Thereupon, the Vedãnti Brãhmin and all of the devotees replied,
“None of us have any doubts at all now.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-46 || 46 ||

Gadhadã I-47
The Characteristics of Those Who Have
the Four Types of Firmness
1

On the morning of Mahã sudi 12, Samvat 1876 [26 January
1820], Swãmi Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large,
The Vachanãmrut

84

decorated cot on the platform under the neem tree in front of the
mandir of Shri Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in
Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, an
assembly of munis as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him.
2

3

Then, snapping the fingers of His right hand, Shriji Mahãrãj
said, “Everyone please listen with attention as I have something to
tell you. What I have to say is simple, but only if you listen carefully
will you be able to grasp its meaning; otherwise, you will not.”
All of the devotees then requested, “Please do tell us, Mahãrãj.”

4

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Of the many devotees of God,
some have firmness in the observance of dharma, some have
firmness in realising oneself as ãtmã, some have firmness in
vairãgya, and some have firmness in bhakti.
Although one
particular type of firmness is predominant in all devotees, they also
possess all of the other types, but to a lesser extent.

5

“A devotee in whom firmness in observing bhãgwat dharma is
predominant loving engages himself in sincerely performing the
menial service of God and His devotees while abiding by the
disciplines related to the dharma of his caste and ãshram, i.e. nonviolence, brahmacharya, etc. Such a devotee also enjoys building
mandirs and cultivating gardens for God.
He enjoys offering
different varieties of delicacies to God and also enjoys hand-plastering
and sweeping the mandirs of God and the residential halls of sãdhus.
In addition, he offers bhakti to God by listening to discourses, singing
devotional songs, etc., without any form of pretence. Moreover, such
a devotee who is firm in observing dharma intensely enjoys listening
to and reading scriptures expounding bhãgwat dharma.

6

“A devotee in whom ãtmã-realisation is predominant always
behaves as the ãtmã, which transcends the three bodies6 and the
three states7, and is characterised by eternal existence.
He
understands his Ishtadev – the manifest form of Shri Krishna
Paramãtmã – as all-transcending, extremely pure, and forever
possessing a divine form. In addition, he talks about and listens to
talks expounding the pure nature of his own ãtmã, as well as talks of
Paramãtmã. He also enjoys scriptures that contain such talks. His
nature is such that he is unable to tolerate anything that obstructs
him in behaving as the ãtmã.
The Vachanãmrut

85

7

“A devotee in whom firmness in vairãgya is predominant has a
persistent dislike for all worldly objects, but not towards God’s form.
Realising those objects to be asatya, he never remembers his home,
his family or other objects that he has renounced – in the same way
that he never remembers faeces once they have been excreted. Such
a devotee only keeps the company of devotees who are renunciants.
In addition, he offers bhakti to God in a manner that does not conflict
with his renunciation. His talks are always predominantly about
renunciation, and he has a liking for scriptures propounding
renunciation. Moreover, he harbours an intense aversion for tasty
food, nice clothes and, in fact, for all worldly objects related to the
panchvishays that may interfere with his renunciation.

8

“A devotee in whom firmness in bhakti is predominant has
intense love only for God’s form. Apart from that form of God, he is
unable to focus his mind’s vrutti towards worldly objects. Yet, he
lovingly offers rich clothes and jewellery to God. Such a devotee also
very much enjoys listening to the human-like actions and incidents of
God, and also greatly enjoys listening to any scriptures describing
God’s form. In addition, he only develops affection towards those
devotees who have love for God. Besides them, though, he never
develops affection towards even his own son or other relatives. Such
a devotee is always engaged in some activity that is related to God.

9

“Now, after reflecting upon this discourse describing the
characteristics of devotees possessing these four types of firmness, all
of you please reveal which of these is your inclination. In actual fact,
this talk is rather like a mirror in that it reveals one’s own
inclination as it is. Furthermore, those who are devotees of God are
never without an inclination, but because they have not recognised
their own inclination, they find that they cannot strengthen it; and
as long as one’s inclination is not strengthened, it will continue to
fluctuate according to the talks one hears. So, after thinking over
this discourse, please reveal your inclinations as they are.”

10

All of the devotees then revealed their respective inclinations.

11

Thereafter, Shriji Mahãrãj requested, “Those who have similar
inclinations, please stand up together.” Then, those devotees with
similar inclinations stood up in turn, after which Shriji Mahãrãj
asked all of them to sit down again.

The Vachanãmrut

86

12

Nityãnand Swãmi then asked, “Do those four types of devotees,
with their respective inclinations, have any virtues or drawbacks in
their inclinations?”

13

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “Yes, they do have virtues and
drawbacks. Please listen as I describe them. The extent to which
devotees with those four inclinations behave according to the
characteristics I have described earlier is their virtue; and the extent
to which they cannot behave according to those characteristics is
their drawback.”

14

Finally, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Is any one of the four who
have such firmness superior or inferior to the others, or are all four
equal?”

15

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “As long as each one adheres to his
firmness, then all four are equal. However, if a person adheres to all
four, then he is superior to all. When one person is firm in all four,
he is known as Param-Bhãgwat; and only he can be called an
Ekãntik Bhakta.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-47 || 47 ||

Gadhadã I-48
The Four Types of Kusangis
1

On the evening of Mahã sudi 13, Samvat 1876 [27 January
1820], Swãmi Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting facing west on
a large, decorated cot on the platform under the neem tree in front of
the mandir of Shri Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in
Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, an
assembly of munis as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him. Two torches were lit in front of Him after the
evening ãrti of Shri Vãsudevnãrãyan and the ‘Nãrãyan’ dhunya had
finished.

2

Then Shriji Mahãrãj said, “I wish to speak to you, so please
listen with attention.”

3
4

All of the munis and devotees said, “Please do, Mahãrãj.”
Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “After performing the puja and
prayers of God, a devotee should daily pray, ‘O Mahãrãj! O Swãmi!
You are an ocean of grace! You are a guardian to those who have
The Vachanãmrut

87

surrendered to You!
kusangis.’”

Please protect me from the influence of

5

Shriji Mahãrãj then elaborated, “There are four types of
kusangis: the first are Kudã-panthis, the second are Shakti-panthis,
the third are shushka-Vedãntis and the fourth are nãstiks. Of these
four types of kusangis, if a person associates with Kudã-panthis, they
will cause him to falter in his religious vows and make him impure.
If a person associates with Shakti-panthis, he will be forced to
consume meat and alcohol, thus deflecting him from his observance
of swadharma. By associating with a shushka-Vedãnti, a person
falls from bhakti and upãsanã because such people claim that the
abode of God, His eternally divine form, and the forms of God’s
avatãrs are all false. Finally, if a person associates with nãstiks,
they propound that only karmas are real and deny the existence of
God, i.e., Shri Krishna Bhagwãn, thereby leading one astray from
the path prescribed by the eternal, sacred scriptures.

6

“Therefore, one should request from God: ‘May I never encounter
the company of these four types of people.’ One should also pray: ‘O
Mahãrãj! Please protect me from the inner enemies of lust, anger,
avarice, infatuation, egotism, jealousy, the belief that I am the body,
etc. Forever bestow upon me the company of your devotees.’ One
should daily pray to God in this manner and always be wary of such
kusangis and one’s inner enemies.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-48 || 48 ||

Gadhadã I-49
‘Antardrashti’
1

On the evening of Mahã sudi 14, Samvat 1876 [28 January
1820], Swãmi Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large,
decorated cot on the platform under the neem tree in front of the
mandir of Shri Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in
Gadhadã. Two small oil lamps were lit in front of Him. He was
wearing a garland of yellow flowers around His neck, and strings of
yellow flowers decorated both wrists. He was dressed entirely in
white clothes. At that time, an assembly of munis as well as
devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

The Vachanãmrut

88

2

Then Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Please begin a question-answer
dialogue.”

3

Thereupon Brahmãnand Swãmi asked, “Why is it that our
vrutti remains on God only as long as we forcibly keep it there,
whereas it remains on worldly objects without the slightest effort?”

4

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “The vrutti of a devotee of God never
remains on anything except God. In fact, his only concern is: ‘It will
be very difficult for me to keep my vrutti on worldly objects.’ Thus, a
devotee of God finds it difficult to keep his vrutti on any worldly
objects, while a worldly person finds it difficult to keep his vrutti on
God. Therefore, a person whose vrutti does not remain fixed on God
is not a devotee of God. Nevertheless, if he attends Satsang, he will
gradually become a devotee by listening to the talks of the sãdhus.”

5

Brahmãnand Swãmi then asked further, “By what means can
one keep one’s vrutti on God?”

6

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “The means to achieve that is
‘antardrashti’. ‘Antardrashti’i is to constantly look towards the form
of the manifest God that one has attained. Besides that form, even if
one sees the six chakras ii , or Golok, Vaikunth or other abodes of God,
it should not be considered to be ‘antardrashti’. Therefore, to look at
God’s form that one has beheld within one’s heart, or to look at the
form of God visible externally, is known as ‘antardrashti’. However,
wherever one’s vrutti strays apart from God’s form is all
‘bãhyadrashti’iii .”

7

Shriji Mahãrãj then told the paramhansas, “Please arrange
yourselves into pairs and begin a question-answer dialogue.”

8

Thereafter, the paramhansas conducted a question-answer
session amongst themselves for quite some time, through which
Shriji Mahãrãj examined their intelligence.
i Literally, ‘antardrashti’ means ‘to look within’ or ‘to introspect’.

But here, Shriji

Mahãrãj gives His own, unique definition.
ii The six

chakras are six ‘centres’ of spiritual power and consciousness located
within the inner body.
They are: ãgnã, vishuddha, anãhat, manipur,
swãdhishthãn, ãdhãr. Each has its corresponding location and deity.
iii

The term ‘bãhyadrashti’ means ‘to look outwards’ and is the antonym of
‘antardrashti’.

The Vachanãmrut

89

|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-49 || 49 ||

Gadhadã I-50
One Possessing a Sharp Intellect
1

In the early hours of Mahã vadi 1, Samvat 1876 [31 January
1820], Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting in front of the veranda outside
Dãdã Khãchar’s medi in Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white
clothes. At that time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees from
various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj asked the munis, “One who possesses
a sharp intellect attains Brahmai . Can the intellect of one who is
proficient in managing worldly affairs be called sharp, or not? Also,
can the intellect of one who is very proficient in interpreting the
Shãstras and the Purãns be called sharp, or not?”

3

The munis attempted to answer the question but were unable to
do so satisfactorily.

4

Then Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “Some people may be extremely
adept in worldly affairs, yet they do nothing at all to safeguard their
own liberation. Others may know the precise meanings of the
various Shãstras, Purãns and Itihãs scriptures, yet they too do
nothing to safeguard their liberation. Therefore, they cannot be said
to possess a sharp intellect; rather, they possess a blunt intellect.
Conversely, a person who safeguards his liberation, even though he
may possess only a limited intellect, should be considered to have a
sharp intellect. On the other hand, a person who, even though
possessing a sharp intellect, pays more attention to worldly affairs
should be considered to possess a blunt intellect. A verse in the
Bhagwad Gitã refers to this fact:

ÿÊ ÁŸ‡ÊÊ ‚fl¸÷ÍÃÊŸÊ¢ ÃSÿÊ¢ ¡ÊªÁÃ¸ ‚¢ÿ◊Ë–
ÿSÿÊ¢ ¡Êª˝ÁÃ ÷ÍÃÊÁŸ ‚Ê ÁŸ‡ÊÊ ¬‡ÿÃÙ ◊ÈŸ—H ii
i Here ‘Brahma’ should be understood as ‘Parabrahma’.
ii Yã nishã sarva-bhootãnãm tasyãm jãgarti sayyamee|

Yasyãm jãgrati bhootãni sã nishã pashyato munehe||
Bhagwad Gitã: 2.69

The Vachanãmrut

90

This verse explains that in the context of worshipping God, all
worldly people behave as if their mind is shrouded in darkness, like
the night; i.e., they do not worship God. The devotees of God,
however, are awake in worshipping God; i.e., they are constantly
engaged in worshipping God. Furthermore, everyone’s mind is
awake with respect to the panchvishays – sights, sounds, smells,
tastes and touch; i.e., they continuously indulge in the vishays. The
minds of the devotees of God, in contrast, are shrouded in darkness
with regards to indulging in the vishays; i.e., they do not indulge in
them.
5

“Therefore, only one who remains alert regarding his own
liberation can be said to possess a sharp intellect. As for others, they
are all mere fools.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-50 || 50 ||

Gadhadã I-51
Only a Diamond Can Cut a Diamond
1

2

On the night of Mahã vadi 2, Samvat 1876 [1 February 1820],
Swãmi Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated
cot on the veranda outside the west-facing rooms in front of the
mandir of Shri Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in
Gadhadã. He was wearing a white survãl and a white angarkhu. He
had also tied a white pãgh around His head. At that time, an
assembly of munis as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him.
Then Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Please ask a question.”

3

Thereupon Purnãnand Swãmi asked, “The ten indriyas are
produced from rajogun, and the four antahkarans are produced from
sattvagun; thus, all of the indriyas and antahkarans are mãyik.
God, however, transcends mãyã. How, then, can one cultivate the
conviction of God through the mãyik antahkarans? Also, how can
one perceive God with one’s mãyik eyes and other indriyas?”

4

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “Mãyik objects can be realised by mãyik
means, and if one has realised God through the same mãyik
antahkarans and indriyas, then it implies that God must also be
mãyik. That is your question, is it not?”
The Vachanãmrut

91

5

Purnãnand Swãmi and all the munis confirmed, “Yes Mahãrãj,
that is precisely our question. You have clarified it for us.”

6

Shriji Mahãrãj then explained, “The answer to that is as follows.
The surface area of the pruthvi is 500,000,000 yojans. On it, are
various objects such as trees, mountains, pots, clothes, etc. That
pruthvi exists within all of those objects, and it also exists distinctly
by its own self. So, if one looks from the perspective of pruthvi, then
it appears that pruthvi has taken the form of all of those objects, and
that no objects exist apart from pruthvi. However, pruthvi itself has
been produced from a small portion of jal. This jal is below the
pruthvi, around it, as well as above it. In fact, jal totally pervades
the pruthvi. Therefore, if one looks from the perspective of jal, only
jal exists – there is no pruthvi at all. Furthermore, that jal has been
produced from a small portion of tej. If one looks from the perspective
of tej, only tej exists – there is no jal. Tej, in turn, has been produced
from a small portion of vãyu. If one looks from the perspective of
vãyu, only vãyu exists – there is no tej at all. Again, that vãyu has
been produced from a small portion of ãkãsh. If one looks from the
perspective of ãkãsh, the other four bhuts of vãyu, jal, etc., and the
entities evolved thereof – the body and the brahmãnd – are not
apparent at all; it appears as if only ãkãsh exists everywhere. That
ãkãsh, in turn, has been produced from a small portion of tãmasahamkãr. That tãmas-ahamkãr along with rãjas-ahamkãr, sãttvikahamkãr, the bhuts, the indriyas, the antahkarans and their
presiding deities have been produced from a small portion of
mahattattva. So, if one looks from the perspective of mahattattva,
the three types of ahamkãrs, the bhuts, the indriyas, the
antahkarans and their presiding deities do not exist – only
mahattattva exists. That mahattattva, in turn, has been produced
from a small portion of Pradhãn-Prakruti. Thus, if one looks from
the perspective of Prakruti, mahattattva does not exist – only
Prakruti exists. However, during the period of dissolution, Prakruti
is absorbed into a small portion of Purush; and at the time of
creation, she is produced again from a small portion of Purush.
Thus, if one looks from the perspective of Purush, only Purush
exists – there is no Prakruti. Countless millions of such Purushes
are produced from a portion of mahãmãyã. So if one looks from the
perspective of mahãmãyã, only mahãmãyã exists – there is no
Purush. Mahãmãyã itself is produced from a small portion of MahãPurush. So if one looks from the perspective of Mahã-Purush, only
The Vachanãmrut

92

Mahã-Purush exists – there is no mahãmãyã. That Mahã-Purush,
in turn, rose from a small region of Akshar – the abode of
Purushottam Bhagwãn. Thus, if one looks from the perspective of
Akshar, neither Mahã-Purush nor anything else exists – there is
only Akshar. But above that Akshar is Purushottam Bhagwãn, who
transcends even Akshar. That Purushottam Bhagwãn is the alldoer – responsible for the creation, sustenance and dissolution of
everything – and is also the cause of all. Now, a cause always
pervades its effect, and simultaneously, also remains distinct from it.
Thus, if one looks from the perspective of Purushottam Bhagwãn –
the cause of all – then nothing else appears to exist except
Purushottam Bhagwãn.
7

“It is this very God who, out of compassion for the liberation of
the jivas, gives darshan in a manifested form to all of the people on
this earth. At that time, if a person realises this greatness of
Purushottam Bhagwãn by profound association with the Sant, then
all of his indriyas and antahkarans become divine like Purushottam
Bhagwãn’s indriyas and antahkaran. Then, through those indriyas
and antahkarans, he can develop the conviction of that God. For
example, a diamond can be cut only by a diamond; it can never be cut
by anything else. Similarly, the conviction of God can only be
cultivated through God. In the same way, the darshan of God is also
possible only through God, but it is not possible through the mãyik
indriyas and antahkarans.”

8

Having delivered this discourse, Shriji Mahãrãj bid ‘Jai
Sachchidãnand’ to all and returned to His residence.
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-51 || 51 ||

Gadhadã I-52
Realising God through the Four Scriptures
1

On Mahã vadi 3, Samvat 1876 [2 February 1820], Shriji
Mahãrãj was having a scripturei read on the veranda outside Dãdã
Khãchar’s medi in Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white

i The scripture was the Moksh-dharma, a chapter from the Mahãbhãrat.

The Vachanãmrut

93

clothes. At that time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees from
various places had gathered before Him.
2

During the reading, a reference was made to the fact that one
who understands God’s form through the four sets of scriptures –
Sãnkhya, Yoga, Vedãnta and Panchrãtra – should be known to be
completely enlightened.

3

Hearing this, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, please
explain how one can realise God through those four sets of scriptures?
Also, what deficiency remains in one who does not realise God in that
way?”

4

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “The Sãnkhya scriptures propound God
as being the 25th element. Moreover, just as the 24 elements2 are
incapable of doing anything without God, jiva and ishwar are also
incapable of doing anything without God. Thus, jiva and ishwar are
also included in the 24 elements. These 24 elements – which include
jiva and ishwar – are called kshetra; and God, the 25th element, is
called kshetragna.

5

“The Yoga scriptures propound God as being the 26th element
and as possessing a definite form. They describe jiva and ishwar as
the 25th element and describe the 24 elements as being distinct from
them. They prescribe that one should meditate on God, realising
one’s ãtmã to be distinct from those elements.

6

“The Vedãnta scriptures describe God as pervading all, being the
cause of all, the supporter of all, nirgun, untainted by mãyã, nondual, as well as being a non-doer despite being the all-doer. They also
describe Him as possessing only divine attributes and not any
worldly attributes.

7

“The Panchrãtra scriptures’ description of God is that there is
one Shri Krishna Purushottam Nãrãyan, and it is he who emanates
into the four forms of Vãsudev, Sankarshan, Aniruddha and
Pradyumna. It is also he who assumes an avatãr on this earth. One
who offers the nine types of bhakti to him attains liberation.

8

“These are the various descriptions of God as given in those four
scriptures. One who thoroughly understands them should be known
to be completely enlightened.

9

“Leaving the other three scriptures aside, if one were to try to
understand God’s form using the Sãnkhya scriptures alone, then a
discrepancy would arise. Specifically, the Sãnkhya scriptures do not
The Vachanãmrut

94

describe jiva and ishwar as being distinct from the 24 elements2.
Thus, when the followers of Sãnkhya reject the 24 elements and
believe their jivãtmã to be distinct from them, they would understand
their jivãtmã, but not God, to be the 25th element.
10

“The drawback in trying to understand God’s form from the
Yoga scriptures alone is that by believing God to possess a definite
form, the followers of Yoga consider Him to have limitations; they do
not understand Him to be the antaryãmi of all and absolutely perfect.

11

“The drawback in trying to understand God’s form from the
Vedãnta scriptures alone is that God – who is described as the cause
of all, pervading all and nirgun – is believed to be formless. The
eternal form of God would not be realised as being devoid of mãyik
arms, legs, etc., and as possessing divine limbs.

12

“The drawback in trying to understand God’s form from the
Panchrãtra scriptures alone is that human traits are perceived in the
avatãrs of God, who are worthy of being offered bhakti. Also, God is
understood as being present in only one place at any one time, but
not as being the antaryãmi of all and absolutely perfect.

13

“These are the types of discrepancies that arise when a person
does not realise God using a combination of all four sets of scriptures.
However, if one attempts to realise God using all four sets of
scriptures together, then the flaw raised by one’s understanding of
one set of scriptures is corrected by one’s understanding of another.
Therefore, he who understands God using all four sets of scriptures
together is known as being completely enlightened. If he ignores one
set of scriptures, he is known as being three-quarters enlightened. If
he ignores two sets of scriptures, he is known as being halfenlightened. If he ignores three sets of scriptures, he is known as
being a quarter enlightened. If, ignoring all four sets of scriptures,
he acts according to his own mentally concocted interpretations of the
scriptures, then, even if he is a Vedãnti or one with upãsanã, he is
lost; i.e., he cannot be said to have found the path of liberation.
Thus, such a Vedãnti’s gnãn is hypocritical, and a person with such
upãsanã is a hypocritical devotee.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-52 || 52 ||

The Vachanãmrut

95

Gadhadã I-53
Progress and Regress
1

On Mahã vadi 9, Samvat 1876 [8 February 1820], Shriji
Mahãrãj was sitting facing west on a large, decorated cot on the
veranda outside the west-facing rooms in front of the mandir of Shri
Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was
wearing a white survãl and a white angarkhu. He had also tied a
rich, orange shelu with a brocaded border around His waist. He had
also tied a rich, orange reto with a brocaded border around His head.
Tassels of flowers were dangling from that pãgh, and He was also
wearing garlands of flowers around His neck. At that time, an
assembly of all of the munis as well as devotees from various places
had gathered before Him.

2

Shriji Mahãrãj then requested, “Someone please ask a question.”

3

Thereupon Muktãnand Swãm i asked, “There are those in the
Satsang fellowship who progress day by day. There are also those
who, despite being in Satsang, seem to regress day by day. What is
the reason for this?”

4

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “A person who perceives flaws in a
great sãdhu gradually regresses in Satsang. Conversely, a person
who perceives virtues in that sãdhu progresses, and his bhakti
towards God also flourishes. Therefore, one should not perceive flaws
in a sãdhu; instead, one should only perceive his virtues.

5

“One should find a flaw in that sãdhu only if he infringes the
disciplines of any of the five religious vows4 prescribed by God.
However, if the sãdhu has no flaws in his observance of those
disciplines, yet on seeing some peculiarity in the sãdhu’s nature, if
one feels that it is improper and thereby focuses only on his flaws,
ignoring his many virtues, then one’s own noble virtues of gnãn,
vairãgya, etc., diminish.

6

“Therefore, only if there is a discrepancy in the observance of
religious vows should one find flaws; one should not find flaws in a
devotee
of
God
for
any
other
trivial
reason.

Moreover, if one does not find flaws, one’s noble virtues will begin to
flourish day by day.”
The Vachanãmrut

96

|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-53 || 53 ||

Gadhadã I-54
Upholding Bhãgwat Dharma;
The Gateway to Liberation
1

On Mahã vadi 11, Samvat 1876 [9 February 1820], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a cushion with a cylindrical
pillow which had been placed on a large, decorated cot on the veranda
outside the west-facing rooms in front of the mandir of Shri
Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was
wearing a white khes and had covered Himself with an orange reto
that had a border of interlaced golden and silver threads. He had
also tied a feto around His head using a sky-blue, silk cloth that was
similarly rich. At that time, an assembly of munis as well as
devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, through the
dialogue between King Janak and the nine Yogeshwars, the 11th
canto of the Shrimad Bhãgwat describes the nature of bhãgwat
dharma. How is that bhãgwat dharma upheld? Also, how can the
gateway to liberation be opened?”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “Bhãgwat dharma is upheld by
maintaining profound love towards the Ekãntik Sant of God, who
possesses the attributes of swadharma, gnãn, vairãgya, and bhakti
coupled with knowledge of God’s greatness. Maintaining profound
love towards such a Sant also opens the gateway to liberation. Thus,
Kapildev Bhagwãn has said to Devhuti:

¬˝‚¢ª◊¡⁄¢ ¬Ê‡Ê◊Êà◊Ÿ— ∑§flÿÙ ÁflŒÈ—–
‚ ∞fl ‚ÊœÈ·È ∑Î§ÃÙ ◊ÙˇÊmÊ⁄U◊¬ÊflÎÃ◊˜H i
‘If a person maintains profound love towards the Ekãntik Sant of God
just as resolutely as he maintains profound love towards his own
relatives, then the gateway to liberation opens for him.’”

i Prasangam-ajaram pãsham-ãtmanaha kavayo viduhu|

Sa eva sãdhushu kruto moksha-dvãram-apãvrutam||
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 3.25.20

The Vachanãmrut

97

4

Thereafter Shuk Muni asked, “By what characteristic can one
recognise a person who would never lapse in his observance of
dharma, even under the most difficult circumstances?”

5

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “A person whose nature is such that he
is diligent in obeying the injunctions of God, and who would never
disobey any injunction, however minor or major, will never regress
from observing dharma, irrespective of the circumstances.
Therefore, only his dharma remains firm who is resolute in obeying
God’s injunctions, and only his satsang remains firm.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-54 || 54 ||

Gadhadã I-55
Resoluteness in Worship, Remembrance and
Observance of Religious Vows
1

On Mahã vadi 11, Samvat 1876 [10 February 1820], Shriji
Mahãrãj was sitting on the east-facing veranda of His own residence
in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in
white clothes. At that time, an assembly of sãdhus as well as
devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Then Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Please begin a question-answer
session.”

3

Thereupon Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Why is a person unable
to maintain a steady resolve in worship, remembrance, and religious
vows?”

4

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “A person’s resolve does not remain
steady due to the influence of adverse places, times, actions and
company. There are, in fact, three levels of this resolve: the highest,
the intermediate and the lowest. If places, times, actions and
company are extremely adverse, then even the highest resolve is
dissolved. What, then, can be said of the intermediate and lowest
levels of resolve?

5

“If, however, one’s resolve remains exactly the same despite the
influence of extremely adverse places, times, actions and company,
then the force of good deeds and merits previously performed by one
must be extremely powerful. If, on the other hand, one’s intellect
becomes polluted despite extremely favourable places, times, actions
The Vachanãmrut

98

and company, then it is because one must have committed a grave
sin or spited a great devotee of God, either in a past life or in this life.
This is because despite association with favourable places, times,
actions and company, one’s mind has still become polluted. Even so,
if a person serves the great Purush diligently, his sins will be burnt
and reduced to ashes. On the other hand, if a person associates with
a grave sinner, then his own sins increase, and any pious deeds that
he may have performed will also be destroyed. Furthermore, a
person who puts his arms around the necks of prostitutes drinking
alcohol, and then blames God by thinking, ‘Why did God not keep my
mind stable?’ should be known as an utter fool.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-55 || 55 ||

Gadhadã I-56
Hollow Stones
1

On the evening of Mahã vadi 12, Samvat 1876 [11 February
1820], Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot on the
veranda outside the west-facing rooms in front of the mandir of Shri
Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was
wearing a white khes and had covered Himself with an orange reto
interlaced with golden and silver threads. He had also tied a reto
with a deep orange border around His head. At that time, an
assembly of munis as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him. After singing the ‘Nãrãyan’ dhunya, some
munis were singing devotional songs to the accompaniment of a
jhãnjh and mrudang.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj requested, “Please conclude singing
devotional songs, and let us conduct a question-answer session for a
while.” Having said this, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Here, let Me ask a
question.” He then began by saying, “Shri Krishna Bhagwãn
mentions four types of devoteesi in the Gitã. Of these, the devotee

i The four types of devotees described in the Gitã (7.16 & 7.17) are: (1) ãrta – one

who is distressed from having fallen from the path of attaining yogic powers, and
thus still wishes to attain them; (2) jignãsu – one who seeks knowledge of the

The Vachanãmrut

99

possessing gnãn is described as being the best. However, supposing
that all four have an equal level of faith in God’s form, how is the one
with gnãn superior?”
3

The munis attempted to answer the question but were unable to
do so satisfactorily.

4

Shriji Mahãrãj then explained, “The devotee possessing gnãn
behaves as brahmaswarup and thoroughly realises the greatness of
God. As a result, no desires remain in his mind except for those of
God’s form. The other three types of devotees, however, do not fully
realise the greatness of God, despite having faith in God. Thus,
desires other than those for God still persist. That is why they do not
come to par with the devotee possessing gnãn. Therefore, if any
desires other than those related to God remain in a devotee, it is a
serious flaw.

5

“Another major flaw is when a person who has no worldly
desires at all and has intense vairãgya behaves arrogantly on account
of that vairãgya. He may have the intense force of knowledge of the
ãtmã or have the force of resolute bhakti towards God, but if, out of
arrogance, he is unable to bow before meek devotees or is unable to
address them humbly, then that is also a serious flaw in him. As a
result of that flaw, his inclination does not flourish.

6

“Consider the analogy of a stone-cutter digging a well. If the
stone underneath sounds hollow when he strikes it, he predicts,
‘There will be plenty of water in this well.’ But, if the stone sounds
solid on the surface, and sparks fly when he strikes it, then the
stone-cutter infers, ‘If there is going to be any water in this well at
all, there will be very little.’ In the same way, a person who remains
arrogant due to the vanity of his gnãn, vairãgya and bhakti may be
called great, but his greatness will be very limited; he does not
imbibe the great virtues imbibed by a humble devotee. Therefore,
whosoever wishes to please God should not become arrogant due to
the vanity of his gnãn, vairãgya and bhakti, or in fact, due to any
other noble virtues he may have. As a result, the incarnate form of
Shri Krishnanãrãyan will become pleased and will reside in the heart
of that person.”
ãtmã, i.e. ãtmã-realisation; (3) arthãrthi – one who desires material objects, i.e.
material pleasures and powers; and (4) gnãni – one who has gnãn.

The Vachanãmrut

100

7

Muktãnand Swãmi then asked, “Mahãrãj, by what method can a
person overcome the vanity which arises due to gnãn, vairãgya,
bhakti, and other noble virtues?”

8

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “If, while realising the greatness of God’s
devotees, he physically bows down to them, serves them menially,
recognises thoughts of vanity when they arise in his heart and
maintains the force of thought, then vanity is eradicated.”

9

Shriji Mahãrãj then continued, “A devotee’s profound, loving
bhakti may be so intense that due to that bhakti, God does as that
devotee wishes. However, if that devotee develops vanity in his heart
due to that bhakti, it constitutes a serious flaw on his part. Also, a
devotee may be vain due to his knowledge of the ãtmã or due to his
vairãgya, but that vanity only serves to strengthen his belief of being
the body. Therefore, devotees of God should not harbour any form of
vanity whatsoever. That is the only means to please God.

10

“Furthermore, if introspective devotees of God examine
themselves and look inwards towards their own hearts, when even a
little vanity arises, they would notice an expression of disgust on the
form of God residing within their hearts. Conversely, when they
behave humbly, God’s form residing within their hearts would appear
to have an extremely pleased expression. Therefore, using the force
of thought, a devotee of God should not allow any sort of vanity to
arise.

11

“If, however, vanity does co-exist with gnãn, vairãgya and
bhakti, it is rather like impurities added to gold. If impurities are
added to 24-carat gold, it becomes 22-carat. Adding more impurities
renders it 18-carat. Adding even more impurities renders it 12-carat
gold. In the same way, as impurities in the form of vanity mix with
that devotee’s gnãn, vairãgya and bhakti, the purity of all three
gradually decreases. Thus, gnãn, vairãgya and bhakti devoid of
vanity are like 24-carat gold.

12

“Furthermore, if a person is vain, those virtues of gnãn,
vairãgya and bhakti may make him appear virtuous superficially,
but he does not have any inner-strength. Consider another analogy:
This pruthvi, with a surface area of 500,000,000 yojans, supports the
oceans, the mountains and all forms of life, and so appears very
strong. However, because the pruthvi floats on jal like a dung cake,
jal appears to be much stronger than pruthvi. Likewise, tej appears
to be much stronger than jal, and vãyu appears to be even stronger
The Vachanãmrut

101

than tej. Finally, although it appears to have no strength at all,
ãkãsh, in fact, is the strongest of them all since it supports all of the
other four. Similarly, the virtues of gnãn, vairãgya and bhakti of a
devotee who has no vanity are as powerful as ãkãsh. Although he
may not outwardly appear to be so, such a humble devotee is superior
to all.
13

“Moreover, just as an infant never has any feelings of vanity, in
the same manner, no matter how much praise or esteem he
encounters, a sãdhu should always behave without vanity – just like
an infant.”

14

Thereafter Muktãnand Swãmi asked another question: “The jiva
is distinct from the indriyas, antahkaran and prãns; it is also
distinct from the three states – waking, dream and deep sleep – and
the three bodies – sthul, sukshma and kãran. After hearing this in
Satsang, a firm conviction regarding this fact has been cultivated.
Why, then, does the blissful jivãtmã still associate with the indriyas,
antahkaran, etc., while engaged in the worship and remembrance of
Paramãtmã and thereby become miserable due to the influence of
disturbing thoughts?”

15

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “Many people become realised yogis,
many become omniscient, many become deities, and thus attain
countless types of greatness, including the highest state of
enlightenment. All this is achieved through the force of the upãsanã
of God. Without upãsanã, though, nothing can be accomplished.
Therefore, the distinction between ãtmã and non-ãtmã cannot be
realised by merely understanding the distinction as given in the
scriptures; nor can it be realised by listening to discourses from a
senior sãdhu and deciding in one’s mind, ‘I shall now distinguish
between ãtmã and non-ãtmã.’ Rather, it is the extent of a person’s
faith in his Ishtadev – God – that determines how much distinction
between ãtmã and non-ãtmã he cultivates. In fact, without using the
strength of his Ishtadev, no spiritual endeavours can be fulfilled.

16

“On the other hand, a person who has profound, loving bhakti for
God, like the gopis, has completed all spiritual endeavours. If,
however, a person does not have such love, then he should
understand the greatness of God in the following way: God is the
master of Golok, Vaikunth, Shwetdwip and Brahmamahol. Although
He appears to be like a human for the purpose of granting happiness
to His devotees, His form in His abodes of Golok, Vaikunth, etc.,
The Vachanãmrut

102

radiates with the brilliance of millions and millions of suns from each
pore of His body. Yet in Mrutyulok, humans serve Him, and He
becomes visible only when a small oil lamp is lit in front of Him.
Nonetheless, it is He who provides light to all – the sun, the moon,
etc. That God is such that Rãdhikã, Lakshmi, and His other
devotees constantly serve Him in His abodes of Golok, Vaikunth, etc.
Following the dissolution of the brahmãnds, it is only this incarnate
God who remains. Also, it is this same God who, at the time of
creation, creates countless millions of brahmãnds through Prakruti
and Purush.
17

“Contemplating on God’s greatness in this manner is the only
method for understanding the distinction between ãtmã and nonãtmã. In addition, the extent of that devotee’s faith in God, coupled
with the knowledge of God’s greatness, also determines the amount of
vairãgya that develops in that devotee’s heart. Therefore, forsaking
one’s dependence on the strength of other spiritual endeavours, one
should rely exclusively on the strength of God’s upãsanã.

18

“Such a devotee believes, ‘However grave a sinner a person may
be, if at the end of his life, he utters, ‘Swãminãrãyan’, he will be
redeemed of all sins and will reside in Brahmamahol. How, then,
can there be any doubt about a devotee who has taken refuge in that
God attaining the abode of God?’ That is how he understands the
greatness of God. Therefore, a devotee of God should increase the
strength of their upãsanã of God day by day by practising satsang.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-56 || 56 ||

Gadhadã I-57
The Most Extraordinary Means to Attain Liberation
1

On Fãgun sudi 2, Samvat 1876 [15 February 1820], Shriji
Mahãrãj was sitting in the residential hall of the sãdhus in Dãdã
Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white
clothes. At that time, an assembly of sãdhus as well as devotees
from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Then Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Those of you who know how to
engage in a questions-answer dialogue may ask one question each.”

3

Thereupon Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, what is the
most extraordinary means of attaining liberation?”
The Vachanãmrut

103

4

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “The knowledge of God’s form and the
knowledge of God’s greatness are the two extraordinary means to
attain liberation.”

5

Muktãnand Swãmi then asked another question, “What is the
nature of love towards God?”

6

Shriji Mahãrãj answered, “The nature of true love is that it
should not entertain any type of logical conditions. If, however, one
develops love by logically thinking of God’s virtues, then when one
perceives flaws in God, one’s love towards Him will be broken. So, it
is best to leave such affection as it was originally, rather than
repeatedly establish it and then raise doubts about it. Instead, one
should develop affection towards God with blind faith; after all,
affection developed by logically thinking of God’s virtues cannot be
trusted. Therefore, one should develop the same type of affection
towards God as one has for one’s bodily relations. This affection is
known as affection due to blind faith. Having said this, though, love
developed by realising God’s greatness is of a totally different nature
altogether.

7

Thereafter Shivãnand Swãmi asked, “Although one has an
intense yearning to stay in the Satsang fellowship, why is it that
some inappropriate swabhãvs are still not eradicated?”

8

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “If a person has not developed an
aversion for the type of swabhãv that hinders him in Satsang, how
can he be said to have an intense yearning for Satsang? And how
can he be said to have realised that swabhãv to be his archenemy?
For example, if a friend of yours were to kill your brother, your
friendship with him would no longer remain; instead, you would be
prepared to cut off his head. Why? Because the relationship with
one’s brother is closer than that with one’s friend. Likewise, a person
may have a swabhãv that causes him to break his religious vows and
fall from Satsang. If, despite this, he still does not harbour any
feelings of enmity towards it and does not develop bitterness towards
it, then he does not have total affection for Satsang. On the other
hand, if his affection for Satsang is like the affection one has for one’s
brother, then he would shun that detrimental swabhãv immediately.
After all, the jiva is extremely powerful. The mind and indriyas are
all merely the kshetra, whereas the jiva is their kshetragna; it can
achieve whatever it attempts.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-57 || 57 ||
The Vachanãmrut

104

Gadhadã I-58
The Body, Bad Company and Past Sanskãrs;
One Becomes like One Perceives the Great
1

2

At the time of the evening ãrti on Fãgun sudi 5, Samvat 1876
[18 February 1820], Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting in the residential hall
of the paramhansas in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was
dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, an assembly of munis
as well as devotees from various places had gathered before Him.
Shriji Mahãrãj then said, “Please ask a question.”

3

Thereupon Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, when a devotee
of God engages in worship and remembrance of God, he is disturbed
by the forces of rajogun and tamogun in his heart; as a result, he is
unable to experience the bliss of worship and remembrance. So, how
can the force of those gunas be overcome?”

4

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “The influence of the gunas is due to
three factors – the body, bad company, and past sanskãrs. Of these,
the gunas that arise due to the body are overcome by reflecting upon
the ãtmã and the non-ãtmã. Gunas that have arisen due to bad
company are eradicated by keeping the company of a sãdhu. Should
these two methods fail to eradicate the force of rajogun and tamogun,
then the problem lies in the influence of some unfavourable sanskãrs
of the past. These are very difficult to eradicate.”

5

Ãnandãnand Swãmi then asked, “How can such unfavourable
sanskãrs of the past be eradicated?”

6

Shriji Mahãrãj answered, “If the extremely great Purush
becomes pleased upon a person, then regardless of how unfavourable
the person’s sanskãrs may be, they are all destroyed. Moreover, if
the great Purush is pleased, a beggar can become a king; regardless
of how unfavourable a person’s prãrabdha may be, it becomes
favourable; and regardless of how disastrous a misfortune he is to
face, it is avoided.”

7

Ãnandãnand Swãmi asked further, “How can a person please
such a great Purush?”

8

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “First of all, he must be honest with
that great Sant.
He must also forsake lust, anger, avarice,
infatuation, matsar, egotism, jealousy, arrogance, and all desires and
cravings. Moreover, he should behave as a servant of the Sant and
The Vachanãmrut

105

maintain a constant effort to eradicate egotism from his heart. While
doing so internally, he should physically continue to bow to everyone
as well. As a result, the great Sant will become pleased with him.”
9

Thereafter Mahãnubhãvãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, while
staying in the Satsang fellowship, how can one eradicate all of one’s
faults? Also, how can one’s bhakti towards God continue to flourish
day by day?”

10

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “The more one continues to imbibe the
virtues of the great Purush, the more one’s bhakti begins to flourish.
In fact, if one realises the truly great Purush to be absolutely lustfree, then, even if one is as lustful as a dog, one will also become lustfree. Conversely, if one perceives the fault of lust in the great
Purush, then no matter how lust-free one may be, one becomes full of
intense lust. In the same manner, if one views the great Purush to
be full of anger or avarice, then one becomes full of anger and
avarice. Therefore, if one understands the great Purush to be
absolutely free of lust, avarice, taste, egotism and attachment, one
will also become free of all of those evil natures and become a staunch
devotee.

11

“What are the characteristics of such a staunch devotee? Well,
just as he has an instinctive dislike for objects that cause misery,
similarly he has an instinctive dislike for the alluring vishays, i.e.,
sights, sounds, smells, tastes and touch. Moreover, he has firm faith
in God alone. Such a person should be known as a staunch devotee.

12

“The only means of becoming such a staunch devotee is by
behaving as a servant of the servants of God, and by realising, ‘All of
these devotees are great; I am inferior compared to them all.’
Realising this, he behaves as a servant of a servant of the devotees of
God. All of the evil natures of a person who behaves in this manner
are destroyed, and day by day, noble virtues such as gnãn, vairãgya,
bhakti, etc., continue to flourish within him.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-58 || 58 ||

Gadhadã I-59
Unparalleled Love
1

On Fãgun sudi 14, Samvat 1876 [27 February 1820], Shriji
Mahãrãj was sitting facing west on a large, decorated cot on the
The Vachanãmrut

106

veranda outside the west-facing rooms in front of the mandir of Shri
Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was
wearing a white khes and had covered Himself with a white cotton
cloth. He had also tied a white cloth with a border of silken thread
around His head. His forehead had been anointed with sandalwood
paste. At that time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees from
various places had gathered before Him.
2

Shriji Mahãrãj then said, “Please begin a question-answer
session.”

3

Thereupon Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, how can
unparalleled love towards God be developed?”

4

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “A person should have the following
understanding: Firstly, conviction of God; i.e., ‘He who I have
attained is undoubtedly God Himself’. He should also have the
attributes of an ãstik. Furthermore, he should realise the divine
powers of God; i.e., ‘This God is the master of Brahmamahol, Golok,
Shwetdwip and all of the other abodes. He is the master of countless
millions of brahmãnds and is the all-doer.’ He should never believe
Purush, kãl, karma, mãyã, the three gunas, the 24 elements2, or
Brahmã and the other deities to be the creators of this brahmãnd;
instead, he should realise only Purushottam Bhagwãn to be the
creator and the antaryãmi of all. Such an understanding, along with
faith in the manifest form of God, is the only way to develop
unparalleled love for God.”

5

Muktãnand Swãmi asked further, “Despite having realised such
greatness of God, why does a person still not develop unparalleled love
for God?”

6

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “If he has realised the greatness of
God in this way, then he indeed does have unparalleled love for God,
but he does not realise it. For example, Hanumãnji possessed
immense strength, but he did not realise it until someone else
revealed it to him. Also, when Pralambãsur abducted Baldevji,
Baldevji possessed tremendous strength, but he himself was unaware
of this fact. Only when a divine voice from the sky informed him did
he become aware of his strength. In the same way, that devotee does
indeed have unparalleled love for God; he is simply not aware of it.”

7

Muktãnand Swãmi asked further, “How, then, can the strength
of that love be realised?”
The Vachanãmrut

107

8

Shriji Mahãrãj answered, “By practising satsang and by
listening to the sacred scriptures one realises that one has
unparalleled love for God.”

9

Thereafter Muktãnand Swãmi asked another question: “Places,
times and actions become either favourable or unfavourable. Is this
due to the company one keeps, or to some other factor?”

10

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “All places are a part of the earth, and
so they are the same everywhere. Time is also the same everywhere.
However, wherever an extremely powerful spiritual person presides,
adverse places, adverse times and adverse actions all become
favourable by his influence. Conversely, by associating with an
extremely vile sinner, even favourable places, favourable times and
favourable actions become adverse. Therefore, the person is the
governing factor in determining whether places, times and actions
are favourable or unfavourable.

11

“If that person is extremely powerful, he will influence places,
times and actions according to his nature throughout the whole
world. A person of slightly less power will be able to influence only
one region. One who is even less powerful will be able to influence
only one village. A person of even less power than that will be able to
influence only a neighbourhood or his own household. In this way,
the favourable or unfavourable influences of places, times and actions
are dependent upon the purity and impurity of these two types of
people.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-59 || 59 ||

Gadhadã I-60
Observing Ekãntik Dharma;
Eradicating Worldly Desires
1

On Fãgun vadi 1, Samvat 1876 [29 February 1820], Shriji
Mahãrãj was sitting in the residential hall of the paramhansas in
Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was wearing a white khes
and had covered Himself with a white cotton cloth. He had also tied
a white pãgh, which was decorated with tassels of white flowers,
around His head. Garlands of white flowers also adorned His neck.
At that time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees from various
places had gathered before Him.
The Vachanãmrut

108

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Of all spiritual endeavours, to
eradicate worldly desires is the greatest endeavour. The means of
doing this is as follows: Bearing in mind one’s craving for the
vishays, i.e., sights, sounds, smells, tastes and touch, one should
introspect, ‘Is my desire for God equal to my desires for the world? Is
it greater? Or is it less?’ One should examine oneself in this
manner. For example, if one’s ears are drawn to worldly talks just
as much as they are drawn to talks related to God, then one should
realise, ‘My desire for God is equal to my desire for the world.’ One
should similarly examine all of the other vishays, i.e., sights, smells,
tastes and touch.

3

“While examining himself in this manner, if a person gradually
decreases his worldly desires and increases his desire for God, he
begins to develop an understanding whereby he views all vishays as
equal. After such equanimity has developed, honours and insults will
appear to be the same to him. Moreover, pleasant and unpleasant
types of touch will appear to be the same; attractive sights and
unattractive sights will appear to be the same; a girl, a young lady
and an old woman will appear to be the same; gold and refuse will
appear to be the same as well. Similarly, pleasant and unpleasant
tastes and smells will also appear to be the same. When a person can
instinctively behave in this way, it should be known that his worldly
desires have been overcome.

4

“In fact, to behave above the influence of worldly desires is the
dharma of one who is ekãntik. But, if some desires do remain, then
even if a person is able to attain samãdhi and control his nãdi and
prãns, those desires will draw him back out of samãdhi. Therefore,
only a person who overcomes worldly desires is an ekãntik bhakta.”

5

Thereupon Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “What are the means to
eradicate worldly desires?”

6

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “Firstly, one requires firm ãtmãrealisation; secondly, one should realise the insignificance of the
panchvishays; and thirdly, one should realise the profound greatness
of God; i.e., ‘God is the master of all abodes – Vaikunth, Golok,
Brahmamahol, etc. So, having attained that God, why should I have
affection for the pleasures of the vishays, which are futile?’ One
should think of God’s greatness in this manner.

7

“Moreover, he thinks, ‘If, due to some deficiency remaining while
worshipping God, I become unworthy of going to the abode of God,
The Vachanãmrut

109

and He were to place me in Indralok or Brahmalok, there is still a
million-fold more bliss there than there is in this world.’ Even with
such a thought one should become free of all desires for the
insignificant pleasures of the world. So, by realising God’s greatness
in this way, one becomes free of worldly desires. Thereafter, one
feels, ‘I never did have any desires; it was all like some kind of
illusion. In reality, I have always been free of desires.’ This is what
one experiences.
8

“Such ekãntik dharma can only be attained by following the
commands of a Purush who is free of worldly desires and who has
attained the state of God-realisation; it cannot be attained merely by
reading books. Even if a person were to attempt to restate those
talks exactly, having merely heard them, he would not be able to do
so properly. Therefore, one can attain ekãntik dharma only from
someone who has already attained the state of ekãntik dharma.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-60 || 60 ||

Gadhadã I-61
King Bali
1

On Fãgun vadi 3, Samvat 1876 [3 March 1820], Shriji Mahãrãj
was sitting on a large, decorated cot on the platform under the neem
tree in front of the mandir of Shri Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã
Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He had tied a white cloth with a
border of silken thread around His head. He was wearing a white
khes and had also covered Himself with a white blanket. He was
wearing garlands of white flowers around His neck, and tassels of
white flowers were dangling from the left side of His pãgh. At that
time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees from various places
had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “How can one remain
composed even under the influence of lust, anger, avarice and fear?”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “‘I am not the body; I am the ãtmã,
which is distinct from the body and is the knower of all.’ When such
ãtmã-realisation becomes extremely firm, one never loses one’s
composure. On the other hand, a person without ãtmã-realisation
may try many other means, but he cannot remain composed.”

The Vachanãmrut

110

4

Thereafter Brahmãnand Swãmi asked, “To what extent does
ãtmã-realisation actually help at the time of death?”

5

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “When faced with the task of crossing a
river, one who knows how to swim can cross it, whereas one who is
unable to swim will be left standing. However, when faced with the
task of crossing an ocean, both require the aid of a ship. Similarly, a
river – in the form of the dualities of cold and heat, hunger and
thirst, honour and insult, happiness and misery – may be crossed by
a person with ãtmã-realisation; death, however, is like an ocean. In
that case, both a person with ãtmã-realisation and a person without
it require the help of a ship in the form of faith in God. Therefore,
only the firm refuge of God is helpful at the time of death, whereas
ãtmã-realisation alone is of no use whatsoever at the time of death.
For this reason, one should firmly cultivate faith in God.”

6

Muktãnand Swãmi then asked another question: “It is said that
yogic powers entice a devotee of God. Does this fact apply only to
those whose faith in God wavers or also to those who have firm
faith?”

7

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “Yogic powers only appear before those
whose faith in God is steadfast; for others, they are very difficult to
attain. In fact, those powers are inspired by God Himself to test His
devotee; that is, ‘Does he have more love for Me or for the powers?’
God tests His devotees in this manner.

8

“If the devotee happens to be staunch and desires nothing except
God, is free of worldly desires and is an ekãntik bhakta, then God
Himself becomes bound by that devotee. Vãmanji, for example,
seized King Bali’s kingdom, which comprised of the realms of swarg,
Mrutyulok and pãtãl, and covered all 14 realms with his first two
steps. Thereafter, King Bali offered his own body for Vãmanji to
place the third step. In this way, King Bali devoutly offered his all to
God. Moreover, despite the fact that God deceived him without any
fault of his own, Bali still did not falter from His bhakti. On seeing
such unparalleled bhakti for him, God ultimately became bound by
Bali. Although God bound King Bali only momentarily, in the
process, God himself became bound by the ropes in the form of Bali’s
matchless bhakti. In fact, to this very day, God is forever standing at
Bali’s gate, never out of King Bali’s sight even for a fraction of a
second.
The Vachanãmrut

111

9

“In the same way, forsaking all other worldly desires and
offering our all to God, we should also remain as servants of God. If,
in the process, God happens to inflict more misery upon us, then God
Himself will become bound by us. This is because He loves His
devotees and is an ocean of compassion; He becomes bound by anyone
who offers profound bhakti to Him. As a result, the mind of a devotee
who has such loving bhakti becomes so bound to God that God is
unable to free Himself from him.

10

“Therefore, we should become more pleased as God puts us
through more severe hardships, bearing in mind, ‘The more misery
God inflicts upon me, the more bound He will become to me; thereby,
He will not be away from me for even a moment.’ With such
understanding, one should become increasingly pleased as God
imposes more and more hardships; but one should never become
disheartened in the face of misery or for the sake of bodily comforts.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-61 || 61 ||

Gadhadã I-62
Acquiring the Virtues of Satya, Shauch, Etc.
1

On Fãgun vadi 4, Samvat 1876 [4 March 1820], Shriji Mahãrãj
was sitting on a large, decorated cot in the middle of the courtyard of
Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was wearing a white khes
and had covered Himself with a white cotton cloth. On His head He
was wearing a white pãgh that was decorated with garlands and
tassels of white flowers. At that time, an assembly of munis as well
as devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Swayamprakãshãnand Swãmi asked, “The Shrimad
Bhãgwat states the 39 redemptive virtues8 that forever dwell in the
form of God. They are:

‚àÿ¢ ‡Êıø¢ ŒÿÊ ˇÊÊÁãÃSàÿÊª— ‚¢ÃÙ· •Ê¡¸fl◊˜–
‡Ê◊Ù Œ◊SÃ¬— ‚Êêÿ¢ ÁÃÁÃˇÊÙ¬⁄UÁÃ— üÊÈÃ◊˜H
ôÊÊŸ¢ Áfl⁄UÁQ ⁄ÒUEÿZ ‡ÊıÿZ Ã¡Ù ’‹¢ S◊ÎÁÃ—–
SflÊÃãòÿ¢ ∑§ı‡Ê‹¢ ∑§ÊÁãÃœÒ¸ÿZ ◊ÊŒ¸fl◊fl øH
¬˝ÊªÀèÿ¢ ¬˝üÊÿ— ‡ÊË‹¢ ‚„U •Ù¡Ù ’‹¢ ÷ª—–
ªÊê÷ËÿZ SÕÒÿ¸◊ÊÁSÃÄÿ¢ ∑§ËÁÃ¸◊Ê¸ŸÙ˘Ÿ„¢∑Î§ÁÃ—H
The Vachanãmrut

112

But how can these virtues be acquired by a sãdhu?”
3

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “If a sãdhu develops the perfect
conviction of God, then he will acquire those redemptive virtues of
God. What is that conviction? Well, he realises that God is not like
kãl, not like karma, not like swabhãv, not like mãyã, and not like
Purush. He realises God to be distinct from everything, their
controller and cause; yet, despite being their cause, He is beyond
their influence. A person who has cultivated a conviction of the
manifest form of God in this manner will never be deflected in any
way. Even if he hears misleading scriptures, or if he hears the talks
of misleading philosophers, or even if his own antahkaran raises
doubts within himself, his conviction of God never wavers in any way
whatsoever.

4

“A person with such a conviction of God is said to have a rapport
with God. Moreover, one naturally acquires the virtues of whomever
one has a rapport with. For example, when our eyes meet with an oil
lamp, the light of that oil lamp enters our eyes, thus expelling the
darkness present before them. In the same manner, one who has
developed a rapport with God by having a firm conviction of Him
acquires the redemptive virtues of God. As a result, just as God is
unattached in all respects and is capable of doing as He chooses, such
a devotee also becomes extremely capable and unattached.”

5

Thereafter Nirvikãrãnand Swãmi asked, “Despite having the
conviction of God, noble virtues are still not acquired; on the
contrary, egotism and jealousy are increasing day by day. What can
be the reason for this?”

6

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “Even if one offers amrut, or
shingadiyo vachhnãg, or dudhpãk and sãkar, or opium in God’s thãl,
the qualities inherent in each will still remain the same; they will
not change in any way. Similarly, a person who is demonic and
extremely undeserving will still not forsake his own swabhãvs even if
he comes into contact with God. Furthermore, if he happens to spite
some meek devotee of God, then the former person will suffer as a
result. Why? Because God is present in everyone as antaryãmi, and
He displays His divine powers whenever and however He wishes.
Therefore, insulting such a devotee amounts to insulting God.
Consequently, the offender suffers severely.
For example,
Hiranyakashipu was so powerful that he had conquered swarg,
Mrutyulok and pãtãl; but because he harassed Prahlãdji, God
The Vachanãmrut

113

manifested from a pillar in the form of Nrusinh and killed
Hiranyakashipu.
7

“Bearing this in mind, a devotee of God should strive to cultivate
humility and should never insult anyone. Why? Because God also
dwells in the hearts of the meek. Thus, He will make anyone who
insults the meek suffer. Realising this, one should not pain even the
smallest of beings. If, however, a person indiscriminately mistreats
others out of arrogance, then God, who is the destroyer of arrogance
and who pervades all as antaryãmi, is unable to tolerate this. He
will appear in one form or another to thoroughly destroy the
arrogance of that arrogant person. Therefore, remaining fearful of
God, a sãdhu should not retain even the slightest arrogance, nor
should he pain even the smallest of beings. This is the dharma of a
non-egotistic sãdhu.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-62 || 62 ||

Gadhadã I-63
Faith; Realising God Perfectly
1

On Fãgun vadi 7, Samvat 1876 [7 March 1820], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot on the
platform outside the west-facing rooms in front of the mandir of Shri
Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was
wearing a white khes and had covered Himself with a white cotton
cloth. He had also tied a white cloth with a border of silken thread
around His head. Garlands of white flowers adorned His neck, and
tassels of roses had been inserted in His pãgh. At that time, an
assembly of munis as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him.

2

Nrusinhãnand Swãmi then asked, “What kind of thoughts arise
in a person who has a deficiency in his faith in God?”

3

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “A person with a deficiency in
faith would become extremely elated on seeing God displaying some of
His powers. However, when he sees no such display of divine powers,
he would become disheartened. If, despite trying, he is unable to
eradicate impure thoughts from his heart, he then bears an aversion
towards God. That is, he would feel, ‘I have bent over backwards
practising satsang for so long, yet God still has not eradicated my
The Vachanãmrut

114

impure thoughts.’ In this manner, he perceives a flaw in God. If,
despite much effort, he is unable to disengage his mind from the
objects he cherishes, he then perceives the very same fault in God.
Specifically, he believes, ‘Just as I have vicious natures such as lust,
anger, etc., God also has the same natures; the only difference is that
God is regarded as being great.’ A person who harbours such
doubting thoughts within should be known to have a deficiency in
faith. His faith cannot be called perfect.”
4

Paramchaitanyãnand Swãmi then asked, “Mahãrãj, what type
of thoughts does a person with perfect faith in God have?”

5

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “A person with perfect faith feels within,
‘I have attained all there is to attain; and wherever the manifest form
of God resides, that itself is the highest abode. All these sãdhus are
like Nãrad and the Sanakãdik; all satsangis are like Uddhav, Akrur,
Vidur, Sudãmã, and the gopas of Vrundãvan; and all female devotees
are like the gopis, Draupadi, Kuntãji, Sitã, Rukmini, Lakshmi and
Pãrvati. Now I have nothing more to achieve – I have attained
Golok, Vaikunth and Brahmapur.’ A person with perfect faith has
such thoughts and experiences extreme elation in his heart. One
who experiences such feelings within should be known to have perfect
faith.”

6

So saying, Shriji Mahãrãj continued, “A person who has realised
the form of God perfectly has nothing left to realise. Please listen as I
now explain the method of realising this; hearing this, one develops
firm faith in God.

7

“Firstly, he should realise the greatness of God. To illustrate
this, consider the analogy of a great king. If even his servants and
maids stay in seven-storey havelis, and their gardens, horses,
carriages, ornaments, and other such luxuries make their houses
appear as majestic as Devlok, then imagine how majestic the darbãr
and its luxuries of that king must be. Similarly, consider the realms
of the lords of this brahmãnd – Brahmã and the other deities – who
follow the commands of Shri Purushottam Bhagwãn. If there is no
limit to those realms and their opulence, then how can one possibly
comprehend the extent of the opulence of Virãt-Purush from whose
navel Brahmã was produced? Furthermore, the master of countless
millions of such Virãt-Purushes is Purushottam Bhagwãn – whose
abode is Akshar. Within that abode, countless millions of such
brahmãnds float like mere atoms in each and every hair of Akshar.
The Vachanãmrut

115

Such is the abode of God. In that abode, Purushottam Bhagwãn
Himself resides eternally with a divine form. Moreover, countless
divine objects exist in that abode. So, if this is the greatness of
Akshar, then how can one possibly comprehend the extent of God’s
greatness? One with faith understands God’s greatness in this
manner.
8

“Besides, that which is greater than another is subtler than the
other and is also its cause. For example, jal is greater than pruthvi,
is the cause of that pruthvi and is subtler than it as well. In turn,
tej is greater than jal, vãyu is greater than tej, and ãkãsh is greater
than vãyu. In the same way, Akshar, Prakruti-Purush, PradhãnPurush, mahattattva and ahamkãr are all progressively greater than
each other, the cause of each other and subtler than each other.
They also possess a form.

9

“In comparison, however, God’s Akshardhãm is extremely large.
Countless millions of brahmãnds float like mere atoms in each of its
hairs. Just as an ant moving on the body of a huge elephant appears
insignificant, likewise, before the greatness of that Akshar,
everything else pales into insignificance. Consider the following: An
ant appears large amidst small mosquitoes; a scorpion appears large
amidst ants; a snake appears large amidst scorpions; a kite appears
large amidst snakes; a bull appears large amidst kites; an elephant
appears large amidst bulls; a mountain such as Girnãr appears large
amidst elephants; and Mount Meru appears large amidst Girnãr. In
turn, Mount Lokãlok appears extremely large amidst a mountain
such as Meru. The pruthvi appears very large in comparison to
Mount Lokãlok. In turn, jal, the cause of pruthvi, is larger than it
and is subtler than it. In the same way, tej is the cause of jal, vãyu
is the cause of tej, ãkãsh is the cause of vãyu, ahamkãr is the cause
of ãkãsh, mahattattva is the cause of ahamkãr, Pradhãn and Purush
are the cause of mahattattva, and Mul-Prakruti and Brahmai are the
causes of Pradhãn and Purush. The cause of all of these is
Aksharbrahma, which is the abode of Purushottam Bhagwãn.

10

“That Akshar does not have any states of contraction or
expansion; it forever remains in the same state. That Akshar also
possesses a form, but because it is so vast, its form cannot be
i Here ‘Brahma’ refers to ‘Mul-Purush’.

The Vachanãmrut

116

visualised. For example, the brahmãnd, which has evolved from the
24 elements2, is known as Purushãvatãr.
That Virãt-Purush
possesses hands, feet, etc., but because his form is extremely vast, he
is beyond visualisation. Brahmã walked for a hundred years on the
stalk of the lotus that emerged from Virãt-Purush’s navel, but was
still unable to reach its end. So if the end of the lotus could not be
reached, how can Virãt-Purush possibly be gauged? Therefore, the
form of Virãt-Purush cannot be visualised. In the same manner,
despite having a definite form, Akshardhãm cannot be visualised.
This is because it is so vast that countless brahmãnds float within its
each and every hair.
11

“It is within that Akshardhãm that Purushottam Bhagwãn
Himself eternally resides. By His antaryãmi powers, He resides in
His anvay form in Akshardhãm, in the countless millions of
brahmãnds, and also in the ishwars of those brahmãnds. Also in
that Akshardhãm, countless millions of muktas, who have acquired
qualities similar to those of God, remain in God’s service. Divine
light equivalent to that of millions and millions of suns radiates from
each and every hair of those attendants of God. Therefore, if those
attendants are so great, how can the greatness of their master,
Purushottam Bhagwãn, possibly be described?

12

“That extremely powerful God Himself ‘enters’ Akshar and
assumes the form of Akshar. Thereafter, He assumes the form of
Mul-Prakruti-Purush, and then the form of Pradhãn-Purush. Then
He ‘enters’ the 24 elements2 produced from Pradhãn and assumes
that form. He then ‘enters’ Virãt-Purush produced from those
elements and assumes that form. Then He ‘enters’ Brahmã, Vishnu
and Shiv and assumes their forms.

13

“In this way, that God, who is extremely powerful, extremely
luminous, and extremely great, contains His own spiritual powers
and divine light within Himself and becomes like a human being for
the liberation of jivas. He assumes a form that allows people to do
His darshan, serve Him, offer worship to Him, etc. For example, a
minute thorn that has pricked an ant’s leg cannot be removed with a
spear or a pin; it can only be removed using an extremely fine needle.
In the same manner, God confines His own greatness within Himself

The Vachanãmrut

117

and assumes an extremely modest form. Just as Agni constrains his
own light and flames to assume a human form, similarly, God also
suppresses His own powers and acts as a human for the liberation of
jivas. However, a foolish person thinks, ‘Why does God not manifest
any powers?’ But he does not realise that God deliberately conceals
His powers for the sake of the liberation of jivas. After all, if He were
to manifest His own greatness, then even the brahmãnd would pale
into insignificance. What, then, can be said of jivas?
14

“Kãl, karma and mãyã are incapable of binding a person who
has developed such firm faith coupled with an understanding of God’s
greatness in his heart. Therefore, he who realises God perfectly in
this way has nothing left to achieve.”

15

Thereafter Nityãnand Swãmi asked, “When God assumes a
human form, does He always do so sequentially in the order
described, or can He also assume a human form directly?”

16

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “For God, sequential order is not
necessary. For example, a person who takes a plunge into a pond can
emerge from wherever he wishes – either at the same entry point of
the dive, or at the banks, or anywhere nearby. Similarly, if He so
wishes, Purushottam Bhagwãn can take a ‘plunge’ in His abode in
the form of Akshar and directly assume a human form; or, if He so
wishes, He can assume a human form following the sequential
order.”

17

Following this explanation, Shriji Mahãrãj continued, “I shall
now briefly explain the characteristics of a person with profoundly
firm faith, so please listen attentively. Firstly, even if he has intense
renunciation, a person with perfect faith will do any task on the path
of pravrutti asked of him, without ever backing away. Moreover, he
does not do it reluctantly; he does it willingly.
The second
characteristic is that regardless of any swabhãv he may possess –
even if it cannot be eradicated by a million means – if he senses God’s
insistence in forsaking that swabhãv, he forsakes it immediately.
The third characteristic is that despite his own drawbacks, he is
unable to live without the discourses and devotional songs related to
God, and without the Sant of God even for a moment. He finds faults
only within himself and thoroughly imbibes the virtues of the Sant.
He also understands the great glory of the discourses and devotional
songs of God, as well as of the Sant of God. A person with such
understanding should be known to have perfect faith. Furthermore,
The Vachanãmrut

118

if a person with such faith were to transgress the religious vows on
account of his prãrabdha, he would still not fall from the path of
liberation. Conversely, regardless of how great a renunciant he may
be, the liberation of a person without such faith is not guaranteed.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-63 || 63 ||

Gadhadã I-64
The Relationship between Sharir and Shariri;
A Master-Servant Relationship
1

On Fãgun vadi 9, Samvat 1876 [9 March 1820], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot on the
platform outside the east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in
Gadhadã. He was wearing a white khes and had covered Himself
with another black-bordered khes. He had also tied a white cloth
with a border of silken thread around His head. Around His neck,
He was wearing a new kanthi made from tulsi beads. At that time,
an assembly of munis as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj asked the munis, “The Shrutis
mention that the ãtmã and Akshar are the sharir of Purushottam,
who is God. That ãtmã and Akshar are not subject to change and
are devoid of any discardable influences of mãyã. Moreover, just as
God transcends mãyã, so do the ãtmã and Akshar. How, then, can
that ãtmã and Akshar be described as the sharir of God? Because
the sharir of a jiva is totally different from the jiva itself and is
subject to change, whereas the jiva, the indweller of the body, is not
subject to change. Therefore, just as the body of the jiva and the
indweller, the jiva itself, are totally different, similarly, there should
be the same degree of difference between Purushottam, and the ãtmã
and Akshar which are the sharir of Purushottam. Please explain in
which way they are different.”

3

All of the munis answered according to their understanding, but
no one was able to offer a precise answer.

4

Shriji Mahãrãj then said, “Allow Me to answer. The ãtmã and
Akshar constitute the sharir of Purushottam Bhagwãn in that they
are pervaded, dependent and powerless. In what way? Well, by
means of His antaryãmi powers, God pervades the ãtmã and Akshar,
The Vachanãmrut

119

whereas the ãtmã and Akshar are the pervaded. God is independent,
whereas the ãtmã and Akshar are dependent upon God.
Furthermore, God is all-powerful, whereas the ãtmã and Akshar are
totally powerless before Him. In this way, God is the shariri of both
the ãtmã and Akshar, and these two are the sharir of God.
5

“That shariri, Purushottam Bhagwãn, possesses an eternally
divine form. With His antaryãmi powers, God resides as the ãtmã of
all the ãtmãs, which pervade their respective physical bodies and are
also those bodies’ drashtã. He also resides in all of the physical
bodies, which, in relation to the ãtmãs, are pervaded and are also
their drashya. In this way, Purushottam Bhagwãn is the ãtmã of
all. When referred to in the scriptures as the ãtmã of drashya –
which has a form – that Purushottam Bhagwãn is described to have
a form, like the drashya. When referred to in the scriptures as the
ãtmã of drashtã, He is described as formless. In reality, however,
Purushottam Bhagwãn is different from both the drashya, which has
a form, and the formless ãtmã. He eternally possesses a definite
form, which is not an ordinary, worldly form. Moreover, despite
possessing a definite form, He is the drashtã of both the drashtã and
the drashya.

6

“Furthermore, He is the inspirer of both the ãtmã and Akshar,
is independent from them and is their controller. He also possesses
all spiritual powers. He is greater than even Akshar, which is
greater than everything. Out of compassion, that Purushottam
Bhagwãn appears as a human being on this earth for the liberation of
jivas. Understanding Him to eternally possess a divine form, a
person who offers bhakti and upãsanã to Him acquires qualities
similar to those of God as well as countless other spiritual powers.
After such a person’s ãtmã has attained Brahma-realisation, he
constantly remains in the service of Purushottam Bhagwãn with love
and great reverence. On the other hand, a person who meditates on
God and does his upãsanã believing Him to be formless is consigned
to brahma-sushupti, from which he never returns. Nor does such a
person ever acquire any spiritual powers from God.”

7

Finally, Shriji Mahãrãj added, “I have delivered this discourse
having experienced it directly Myself. Therefore, there is not a trace
of doubt about it. Moreover, these facts can be understood only from
a person who firmly believes that God is forever divine and possesses

The Vachanãmrut

120

a form; they can never be understood from others. Therefore, these
facts should be thoroughly imbibed by all.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-64 || 64 ||

Gadhadã I-65
‘Gnãn-shakti’, ‘Kriyã-shakti’ and ‘Ichchhã-shakti’
1

On Fãgun vadi 14, Samvat 1876 [13 March 1820], Shriji
Mahãrãj was sitting on a cushion with a cylindrical pillow placed on
the veranda outside His bedroom in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in
Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, an
assembly of paramhansas as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him.

2

While scriptural reading was underway, Shriji Mahãrãj called
the senior paramhansas near Him. Then when the reading of the
scriptural passage was completed, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Now all of
the senior sãdhus seated here will answer each other’s questions,
since doing so reveals one’s level of intelligence.”

3

Thereupon Swayamprakãshãnand Swãmi asked Paramãnand
Swãmi, “How is ãkãsh created and destroyed?”

4

Paramãnand Swãmi attempted to answer the question but was
unable to do so satisfactorily.

5

Shriji Mahãrãj then said, “When a child is initially in its
mother’s womb and at the time of its birth, the cavities of its heart
and other indriyas are small. But as the child grows, those cavities
also develop, and the ãkãsh within seems to increase as well. When
it becomes old, however, the cavities of its indriyas decrease in size,
and the ãkãsh within also appears to contract. Similarly, when
Virãt’s body is produced, ãkãsh appears to be created in the cavity of
his heart and other internal organs. Moreover, when Virãt’s body is
destroyed, the ãkãsh within appears to be destroyed as well. This is
how ãkãsh is created and destroyed. However, just as PrakrutiPurush are eternal, the ãkãsh that is the supporter of all is also
eternal and is not subject to creation or destruction. Furthermore,
ãkãsh is also created and destroyed through samãdhi; one who
experiences samãdhi knows its method.”

The Vachanãmrut

121

6

Thereafter Paramãnand Swãmi asked Swayamprakãshãnand
Swãmi, “How does the sushumnã nãdi reside within the body and
outside of the body?”

7

Swayamprakãshãnand Swãmi attempted to answer the question
but could not do so satisfactorily.

8

So Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “Whatever is present in this
brahmãnd is also present within this body; the only difference is that
in the body the scale is small, whereas in the brahmãnd it is large.
In fact, the arrangement of the brahmãnd is the same as that of the
body. For example, just as there are rivers in the brahmãnd,
similarly there are blood vessels in the body; just as there are oceans
in the brahmãnd, similarly water is present in the abdomen of the
body; and just as the sun and the moon are present in the brahmãnd,
similarly the idã nãdi and pingalã nãdi house the sun and moon in
the body. In the same way, just as other objects are present in the
brahmãnd, they are also present in the body.

9

“Also, the nãdis of the indriyas in this body are one with those of
the brahmãnd. When one acquires control over the tongue, one
attains Varundev; when one acquires control over speech, one attains
Agnidev; when one acquires control over the skin, one attains
Vãyudev; when one acquires control over the genitals, one attains
Prajãpati; and when one acquires control over the hands, one attains
Indra. In the same way, when one controls the brahmarandhra –
the end portion of the sushumnã nãdi located in the heart – one
reaches the fiery deity by the name of Vaishwãnar, which resides in
the shishumãr chakra. It is then that one sees the uninterrupted
path of light from the brahmarandhra to Prakruti-Purush. That
path of light is known as sushumnã. This is how the sushumnã
nãdi resides in the body and in the brahmãnd.”

10

Paramãnand Swãmi then asked Swayamprakãshãnand Swãmi
another question: “Which state dissolves first – the waking state, the
dream state, or the deep sleep state?”

11

As Swayamprakãshãnand Swãmi was unable to answer that
question, Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “When one focuses on the form of
God with love in the waking state, the waking state dissolves first,
then the dream state, and finally the deep sleep state. When the
mind thinks of and focuses on the form of God in the dream state, the
dream state dissolves first, then the waking state, and finally the
deep sleep state. Furthermore, when one attains the state of upsham
The Vachanãmrut

122

while contemplating on the form of God, the deep sleep state dissolves
first, then the waking state, and finally the dream state.” Shriji
Mahãrãj answered the question in this manner.
12

Thereafter, Swayamprakãshãnand Swãmi asked Paramãnand
Swãmi another question: “How should one understand the ‘ichchhãshakti’, ‘gnãn-shakti’ and ‘kriyã-shakti’ – the faculties of volition,
cognition and conation – of God?”

13

Laughing, Shriji Mahãrãj commented, “Even you probably do
not know the answer to that question.” So saying, He began to give
the answer Himself: “When sattvagun is predominant, the fruits of
any karmas performed by a jiva are experienced in the waking state.
When rajogun is predominant, the fruits of any karmas performed
are experienced in the dream state. When tamogun is predominant,
the fruits of any karmas performed are experienced in the deep sleep
state.

14

“Moreover, when a jiva enters the state of deep sleep, it becomes
inert like a slab of stone and retains no type of consciousness; such
as, ‘I am a pundit, or I am a fool; I have done this task, or I want to
do this task; this is my gender, or this is my caste, or this is my
ãshram; this is my name, or my appearance is like this. Am I a
deity, or am I a human? Am I a child, or am I old? Am I righteous,
or am I a sinner?’ and so on. No such consciousness is retained.
When a jiva enters such a state, God awakens it from
unconsciousness through His ‘gnãn-shakti’ and makes it aware of its
actions. This is known as ‘gnãn-shakti’, the faculty of cognition.
Furthermore, whatever action a jiva engages in, it does so with the
support of what is known as God’s ‘kriyã-shakti’, the faculty of
conation. Finally, whatever object a jiva desires, it acquires with the
help of what is known as God’s ‘ichchhã-shakti’, the faculty of
volition.

15

“Moreover, the three states of waking, dream and deep sleep
experienced by a jiva are not due to the consequences of its own
karmas alone. They are experienced only when the giver of the fruits
of karmas, God, allows the jiva to do so. When a jiva, indulging in
the fruits of the waking state, wishes to enter the dream state, it
cannot do so independently. This is because God, the giver of the
fruits of karmas, restrains its vrutti. Similarly, if it wishes to enter
the waking state from the dream state, it is unable to do so. Nor can
it enter the deep sleep state or emerge from it to enter the dream or
The Vachanãmrut

123

waking states. It is only when God, who grants the fruits of karmas,
allows it to indulge in the fruits of the karmas of that particular state
that it is able to indulge in them. However, a jiva cannot indulge in
the fruits of its karmas according to its own will or as a direct
consequence of its karmas. This is how one should understand the
‘gnãn-shakti’, ‘kriyã-shakti’ and ‘ichchhã-shakti’ of God.”
16

Shriji Mahãrãj answered the question in this manner out of
compassion.
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-65 || 65 ||

Gadhadã I-66
Misinterpreting the Words of the Scriptures;
The Four Emanations of God
1

On Fãgun vadi Amãs, Samvat 1876 [14 March 1820], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot on
the platform outside the east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr
in Gadhadã. He was wearing a khes with a black border and had
covered Himself with a white blanket. He had also tied a white feto
around His head. At that time, an assembly of munis as well as
devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “The Shrimad Bhãgwat
describes Vãsudev, Sankarshan, Pradyumna and Aniruddha – the
four emanations of God9. In some places they are described as sagun,
whereas in other places they are described as nirgun. The term
nirgun is used in reference to Vãsudev Bhagwãn, and the term sagun
is used in reference to Sankarshan, Aniruddha and Pradyumna.
However, when described as nirgun, the minds of the listener and the
reader are baffled, and they draw the conclusion that God does not
possess a form. This, however, is their misunderstanding.

3

“Besides, the words of the scriptures cannot be understood in
their true context by anyone except an ekãntik bhakta. Which
words? Words such as: ‘God is formless’, ‘universally pervasive’,
‘luminous’ and ‘nirgun.’ On hearing such descriptions, a fool
concludes that the scriptures describe God as being formless. On the
other hand, an ekãntik bhakta realises, ‘When the scriptures describe
God as being formless and nirgun, they are referring to the fact that
He does not possess a mãyik form or mãyik attributes. In reality,
The Vachanãmrut

124

His form is forever divine, and He possesses countless redemptive
virtues.’
4

“There is also a reference to God being an immense mass of
divine light. However, if there is no form, then there can be no light
either; therefore, that light must definitely be from that form. Take,
for example, the form of Agni. When flames emanate from his form,
only the flames – not the form of Agni – are seen. A wise man,
however, realises that the flames are definitely emanating from
Agni’s form. Similarly, water emanates from the form of Varun.
Although only the water – not the form of Varun – is visible, a wise
man realises that the water emanates from Varun’s form. In the
same way, having the intensity of a million suns, the divine light,
which is like brahmasattã, is the light of the form of Purushottam
Bhagwãn.

5

“The scriptures also state, ‘A thorn is used to remove a thorn.
Thereafter, both are discarded. Similarly, God assumes a physical
body to relieve the earth of its burdens. Then, having relieved the
earth of its burden, He discards that physical body.’i Hearing such
words, the foolish are misled into the understanding that God is
formless; they fail to realise the form of God as being divine.

6

“An ekãntik bhakta, however, has the following understanding:
To fulfill Arjun’s pledge, Shri Krishna Bhagwãn, with Arjun, left
Dwãrikã on his chariot to fetch the Brãhmin’s son. Crossing Mount
Lokãlok, they cut through mãyã’s veil of darkness with the
Sudarshan Chakra. Driving the chariot through that darkness, they
entered a mass of light. There, they collected the Brãhmin’s son
from Bhumã-Purush before returning. But it was only because Shri
Krishna Bhagwãn’s form was divine that, due to the power of that
divinity, the wooden chariot and the horses – despite being composed
of the five bhuts – all became divine and like chaitanya; i.e., they
transcended mãyã. Had their forms not become divine, they would
i This is in reference to the verse:

‘ÿÿÊ„U⁄UjÈflÙ ÷Ê⁄¢U ÃÊ¥ ÃŸÈ¢ Áfl¡„UÊfl¡—–
∑§á≈U∑¢§ ∑§á≈U∑§Ÿfl mÿ¢ øÊ¬ËÁ‡ÊÃÈ— ‚◊◊˜H’
Yayãharad-bhuvo bhãram tãm tanum vijahãvajaha|
Kantakam kantakeneva dvayam chãpeeshituhu samam||
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 1.15.34

The Vachanãmrut

125

never have been able to transcend mãyã; after all, everything that
has evolved from mãyã ultimately merges into mãyã, and can never
reach Brahmai , which transcends mãyã. Thus, it was due to the
powers of God’s form that such mãyik objects became non-mãyik. A
fool, however, realises God’s form as mãyik, whereas an ekãntik
sãdhu realises God’s form to transcend Akshar and also realises
Purushottam Bhagwãn – who possesses a definite form – as the ãtmã
of countless millions of brahmarup muktas, as well as of
Akshardhãm.
7

“Therefore, regardless of which scriptures are being read, if they
describe God as being ‘nirgun’, one should realise that they are
merely extolling the glory of God’s form; but, in fact, God always
possesses a definite form. One who realises this is known as an
ekãntik bhakta.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-66 || 66 ||

Gadhadã I-67
Acquiring the Virtues of the Satpurush
1

On Chaitra sudi 7, Samvat 1876 [21 March 1820], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting in the residential hall of the munis
in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in
white clothes. At that time, an assembly of munis as well as
devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj asked the munis, “There is a
Satpurush who has no affection at all for the pleasures of this world;
he harbours desires only for the higher realms, i.e., the abode of God
and for the form of God. He also wishes the same for whoever
associates with him. He feels, ‘As this individual has associated with
me, it would be of great benefit to the individual if his desires for this
world are eradicated and his affection for God is developed.’
Furthermore, all of the efforts the Satpurush makes are only for
acquiring bliss after attaining the abode of God after death, but he
never does anything for the sake of bodily comforts. So, with what

i

Here ‘Brahma’
‘Akshardhãm’.

The Vachanãmrut

should

be

understood

as

‘Aksharbrahma-dhãm’

or

126

understanding can a spiritual aspirant acquire the virtues of such a
Satpurush, and what understanding causes such virtues not to be
acquired? That is the question.”
3

Muktãnand Swãmi replied, “If one views such a Satpurush who
has no desire for the pleasures of this world as being divinei , and if
one accepts whatever words he utters as the truth and acts
accordingly, then that aspirant will acquire the virtues of that
Satpurush. One who does not do so will not acquire those virtues.”

4

Shriji Mahãrãj then said, “That answer is correct, but please
listen as I explain the method of understanding by which an aspirant
can acquire the virtues of the great Satpurush. A person imbibes the
virtues of such a Purush, who has no affection for anything except
God, by believing, ‘This Purush is extremely great.
Despite
thousands of people standing before him with folded hands, he does
not have the slightest desire for the pleasures of the world. As for
me, I am extremely insignificant, and I am solely attached to worldly
pleasures. I do not understand anything at all about God. Shame on
me.’ In this way, he feels remorse and imbibes the virtues of the
great Purush. He also feels remorse after realising his own flaws.
While repenting in this way, vairãgya arises in his heart, and
thereafter, he acquires virtues similar to those of that Satpurush.

5

“Now, please listen as I describe the characteristics of a person
in whose heart the virtues of the Satpurush are never acquired.
Such a person believes, ‘The Satpurush is said to be great, yet he has
no kind of common sense whatsoever. He does not even know how to
eat or drink properly, nor does he know how to dress properly. God
has given him abundant pleasures, yet he does not know how to enjoy
them. Moreover, when he gives anything to anyone, he does so
i This is in reference to the verse:

‘ÿSÿ Œfl ¬⁄Ê ÷ÁQ ÿ¸ÕÊ Œfl ÃÕÊ ªÈ⁄ı–

ÃSÿÒÃ ∑§ÁÕÃÊ ±ÿÕÊ¸— ¬˝∑§Ê‡ÊãÃ ◊„Êà◊Ÿ—H’
Yasya deve parã bhaktir-yathã deve tathã gurau|
Tasyaite kathitã hyarthãhã prakãshante mahãtmanaha||
All those attainments noted [in the scriptures] shine forth [i.e. are attained] for
the great person who has the same profound bhakti towards the guru as he has
towards God.
Shvetãshvatara Upanishad: 6.23

The Vachanãmrut

127

indiscriminately.’ In this way, he perceives countless types of flaws
in the Satpurush. Such a malicious person never acquires the
virtues of the Satpurush.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-67 || 67 ||

Gadhadã I-68
God Forever Resides in the Eight Types of Murtis and
in the Sant
1

On Chaitra sudi 9, Samvat 1876 [23 March 1820], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot under the
neem tree in front of the mandir of Shri Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã
Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was wearing a white khes and
had covered Himself with a white cotton cloth. Around His head, He
had tied a white cloth that had a border of silken thread. At that
time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees from various places
had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Allow Me to ask a question.”

3

The munis responded by saying, “Please do ask.” Shriji Mahãrãj
thus began, “For one month during the famine of ’69i , whenever I
entered samãdhi, I felt I had gone to Purushottampuri, where I
entered and resided in the murti of Shri Jagannãthji. That murti
may appear to be wooden, but through its eyes I observed everything.
I observed both the bhakti and the deceitful ways of the mandir
priest. In the same way, those people in our Satsang fellowship who
have mastered samãdhi can also enter others’ bodies through
samãdhi, and see and hear everything. The scriptures also mention
that Shukji spoke through the medium of a tree. Therefore, a great
holy person or God can enter wherever they wish.

4

“The murtis which God has given for worship by His command
are of eight typesii . God Himself personally enters those murtis and
resides within them. A devotee of God who worships those murtis
i The year refers to Samvat 1869.
ii The eight types of

murtis are shaili (of stone), dãrumayi (of wood), lauhi (of
metal), lepyã (of earth or sandalwood paste), lekhyã (engraved or drawn), saikati
(of sand), manimayi (of gems) and manomayi (mental).

The Vachanãmrut

128

should maintain the same respect for them as he does for the
manifest form of God. In the same way, God also resides in the heart
of the Sant. Therefore, the Sant should also be respected. Yet, a
devotee totally fails to respect him. He considers a murti to be
merely a painting or to be made of stone or other materials.
Furthermore, he looks upon that Sant as an ordinary human being.
But God himself has said, ‘I forever reside in the eight types of
murtis and in the Sant.’ Still, that devotee behaves disrespectfully
before the murtis of God and before the Sant, not fearing God in the
least. Does such a person have faith in God, or not? That is the
question.”
5

The paramhansas replied, “Because he does not realise God to be
antaryãmi and so fails to respect Him, such a devotee does not have
faith in God at all.”

6

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj added, “Not only does he not have
faith, but his bhakti is like that of a hypocrite.” Shriji Mahãrãj then
asked further, “Will such a devotee attain liberation, or not?”

7

The sãdhus replied, “No, he will not attain liberation.”

8

Shriji Mahãrãj then continued, “A person who develops such a
nãstik attitude towards the murtis of God and the Sant will not
merely stop there; he will also develop nãstik feelings towards the
manifest form of God whom he worships. He will also develop such
nãstik feelings towards the abodes of God such as Golok, Brahmapur,
etc.
Furthermore, he will come to believe that the creation,
sustenance and dissolution of this cosmos is due to kãl, mãyã and
karma, but not due to the will of God. In this way, he will become a
staunch nãstik.”

9

Thereafter Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Is the cause of such a
nãstik attitude one’s past karmas or the influence of evil company?”

10

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “The sole cause of the development of
such a nãstik attitude is listening to the scriptures of nãstiks and
keeping the company of one who has faith in those scriptures.
Furthermore, lust, anger, avarice, arrogance, egotism and jealousy
also cause such a nãstik attitude to develop. Why? Because if a
person possesses any one of those swabhãvs, then he will not be able
to believe the talks of even sãdhus such as Nãrad and the Sanakãdik.

11

“When is such a nãstik attitude overcome? Well, when one
listens to talks of the divine actions and incidents of God, such as the
The Vachanãmrut

129

creation, sustenance and dissolution of the cosmos as described in
ãstik scriptures like the Shrimad Bhãgwat, and also understands the
greatness of God and the Sant, such a nãstik attitude is overcome
and an ãstik attitude develops.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-68 || 68 ||

Gadhadã I-69
The Dharma of a Wicked Person and a Sãdhu
1

On Chaitra sudi 12, Samvat 1876 [26 March 1820], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot on the
veranda outside the west-facing rooms in front of the mandir of Shri
Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was
dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, an assembly of munis
as well as devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Following the evening ãrti of Shri Vãsudevnãrãyan and the
chanting of the ‘Nãrãyan’ dhunya, Shriji Mahãrãj asked the munis,
“What exactly is dharma? Please base your reply on the scriptures.
The question arises because even the kings of the past who indulged
in violence did not harm those who took their refuge, nor did they
allow others to harm them. So, is the sin committed by killing
others considered the same as the sin of killing a person who has
sought one’s refuge?”

3

The munis attempted to reply according to their own
understanding, but due to queries raised by Shriji Mahãrãj, no one
was able to offer a satisfactory answer. All of the munis then said,
“Mahãrãj, we would like to put the same question to You. Because,
violence performed on animals as part of a sacrifice or some other
ritual is considered to be dharma; but non-violence is also considered
to be dharma. Please clarify this.”

4

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “Dharma involving
violence is for the attainment of dharma, arth and kãm. Moreover,
that dharma which permits violence is, in fact, for the purpose of
limiting violence.
Non-violence, on the other hand, is for the
attainment of liberation – which is the dharma of a sãdhu. Dharma
involving violence is for fulfilling worldly desires, but it is not for the
attainment of liberation. Non-violence, however, is solely for the
purpose of attaining liberation.
The Vachanãmrut

130

5

“Therefore, for both householders and renunciants, only nonviolence has been cited for the attainment of liberation. For example,
King Uparicharvasu ruled over a kingdom and still followed a nonviolent lifestyle. Therefore, a sãdhu should not bear malice to anyone
by thought, word or deed. Neither should he harbour any form of
arrogance, but instead, he should behave as a servant of servants
with all.

6

“In comparison, having a hostile personality is the dharma of a
wicked person, and behaving in a calm manner is the dharma of a
sãdhu. Someone may then ask, ‘How is it possible to maintain the
virtues of a sãdhu while trying to make thousands of people conform
to their niyams?’ Well, the reply to that question is that King
Yudhishthir reigned over a kingdom stretching for thousands of
miles, yet he managed to maintain the virtues of a sãdhu.
Conversely, there may be thousands like Bhimsen who intimidate
others and are unable to change their ways despite being
reprimanded. In fact, there is no shortage of people with such an
arrogant nature; there are countless such people. To be a sãdhu,
though, is indeed very difficult.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-69 || 69 ||

Gadhadã I-70
Kãkãbhãi’s Question; A Thief Injured by a Thorn
1

On Chaitra sudi Punam, Samvat 1876 [29 March 1820], Shriji
Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot on the veranda outside
the east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He had
tied a white cloth with a border of silken thread around His head. He
was wearing a white khes and had also covered Himself with a white
cotton cloth. With His hand, He was turning a rosary of tulsi beads.
At that time, an assembly of paramhansas as well as devotees from
various places had gathered before Him.

2

Then Shriji Mahãrãj said, “The senior paramhansas, please ask
each other questions; or if a householder has a question, he may ask
the paramhansas.”

3

Thereupon Kãkãbhãi, a devotee from the village of Rojkã, asked
Nityãnand Swãmi, “Deep within one’s heart, something beckons one
to indulge in the vishays, while something else dissuades one from
The Vachanãmrut

131

indulging in them, saying no. What is it that says no, and what is it
that says yes?”
4

Nityãnand Swãmi replied, “It is the jiva that says no, and the
mind that says yes.”

5

Shriji Mahãrãj then said, “Allow Me to answer that question.
From the very day we began to understand and realised who our
parents were, they have indoctrinated into us the following: ‘This is
your mother and this is your father; this is your paternal uncle and
this is your brother; this is your maternal uncle and this is your
sister; this is your maternal aunt and this is your paternal aunt; this
is your mother’s sister and this is your buffalo; this is your cow and
this is your horse; these are your clothes and this is your house; this
is your mansion and this is your farm; these are your ornaments,’
and so on. These words of kusangis have been imprinted in the
mind. How are they imprinted? Well, it is rather like the small
piece of glass that women attach into works of embroidery – the mind
represents the embroidery, and the jiva represents the piece of glass.
In this manner, the words and the sights of those kusangis, along
with the other types of vishays, have become imprinted in the mind.

6

“Then, after that person enters the Satsang fellowship, the Sant
talks about the glory of God, denounces the vishays, and also explains
that the world is perishable. Thereby, the words and the sight of the
Sant dwell in the person’s mind.

7

“Analogously, then, there are two armies facing each other. In
the battlefield of Kurukshetra, for example, the armies of the
Kauravs and the Pãndavs stood facing each other and fought with
arrows, spears, projectiles, artillery and chains. Some fought with
swords, some with maces, others with their bare hands. In the
process, some lost their heads, others injured their thighs and many
were slaughtered. In the same way, in the person’s antahkaran are
the forms of the kusangis standing armed with their weapons, i.e.,
the panchvishays; as well as the form of the Sant standing armed
with weapons in the form of words such as, ‘God is satya; the world is
perishable; and the vishays are false.’ A mutual conflict thus exists
between these two sets of words. When the force of the kusangis
prevails, a desire to indulge in the vishays arises; when the force of
the Sant prevails, the desire to indulge in the vishays disappears. In
this way, there is a conflict within the antahkaran. Hence the verse:
The Vachanãmrut

132

ÿòÊ ÿÙªE⁄U— ∑Î§cáÊÙ ÿòÊ ¬ÊÕÙ¸ œŸÈœ¸⁄U—–
ÃòÊ üÊËÁfl¸¡ÿÙ ÷ÍÁÃœ˝È¸flÊ ŸËÁÃ◊¸ÁÃ◊¸◊H i
This verse explains: ‘Where there is Yogeshwar – Shri Krishna
Bhagwãn – and where there is the great archer Arjun, only there do
Lakshmi, victory, divine powers and resolute morality exist.’
Therefore, one should have a firm conviction that victory belongs to
the one on whose side these sãdhus happen to be.”
8

Kãkãbhãi then asked further, “Mahãrãj, by what means can the
force of the Sant increase and the force of the kusangis decrease?”

9

To this Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “The kusangis residing within
and those residing externally are both one. Also, the Sant residing
within and the one residing externally are both one. Now, the force
of the internal kusangis increases with the nurturing of the external
kusangis. In the same way, the force of the Sant within increases
with the nurturing of the Sant residing externally. Therefore, by
avoiding the company of external kusangis and by keeping the
company of only the Sant residing externally, the force of the
kusangis decreases and the force of the Sant increases.” That is how
Shriji Mahãrãj answered that question.

10

Again, Kãkãbhãi asked, “Mahãrãj, on the one hand, there is a
person who has overcome the fight against kusangis, and for whom
only the force of the Sant is predominant. On the other hand, there
is another person whose conflict is still on-going. Of the two, when
the former dies, there is no doubt that he will attain the abode of God.
But please tell us what will be the fate of the latter – whose conflict is
still ongoing – when he dies?”

11

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “On waging war, one person may face
Vãniyãs or someone from a weak caste. Consequently, he may win
easily. Another person, however, is confronted by a battalion of
Arabs, Rajputs, Kãthis and Kolis – who are very difficult to conquer,
certainly not as easy to defeat as the Vãniyãs. Therefore, his fight
continues. If, in the process of such fighting, he wins, then all is well
and good. But if while fighting he does not give in to his opponents –
i Yatra yogeshvaraha krushno yatra pãrtho dhanur-dharaha|

Tatra shreer-vijayo bhootir-dhruvã neetir-matir-mama||
Bhagwad Gitã: 18.78

The Vachanãmrut

133

despite their attempts – and if he were to die at that time, would his
master not be aware of his valiant efforts? Would He not appreciate
that, compared to the one who faced the easy opposition of the
Vãniyãs, this person faced formidable opposition that was difficult to
overcome? The master would indeed be well aware of both situations.
In the same way, God is sure to help such a person as you have
described.
He would believe, ‘This person is faced with the
overwhelming force of fluctuating thoughts, yet he is still putting up
a gallant fight.
Therefore, he deserves to be congratulated.’
Realising this, God does help him. For this reason, then, one should
remain carefree and not worry in the least. One should continue to
worship God in the same fashion, keep the Sant predominant, and
stay away from kusangis.” Shriji Mahãrãj thus replied in a joyful
manner.
12

Thereafter, Jivãbhãi of the village Jaskã asked Nityãnand
Swãmi, “How does unfaltering faith in God develop?”

13

Nityãnand Swãmi replied, “If one avoids the company of
kusangis and constantly keeps the company of sãdhus, then by
listening to the talks of those sãdhus, unfaltering faith in God will
develop. However, if one keeps the company of kusangis, such
unfaltering faith will not develop.”

14

Again Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Allow Me to answer that question.”
Continuing, He said, “One should cultivate faith in God for the sole
purpose of the liberation of one’s jiva, but not out of a desire for some
material object. For example, ‘If I practise satsang, my ill body will
recover,’ or ‘As I am childless, may I get a son,’ or ‘As my sons are
dying, may they stay alive,’ or ‘Since I am poor, may I become rich,’
or ‘If I do satsang, I will regain my lost assets.’ One should not
practise satsang harbouring desires for such material gains. If one
does practise satsang while nourishing such desires, then one may
become a very staunch satsangi if those desires are fulfilled; but if
one’s desires are not fulfilled, one’s faith will diminish. Therefore,
one should practise satsang solely for the liberation of one’s jiva; one
should not harbour any desire whatsoever for any material objects.

15

“Besides, if there are ten members in a household and all ten are
faced with death, then is it a small feat if even one is saved? Or if
one was destined to have to beg for food but received a rotlo to eat
instead, is that a small feat? In these cases, one should believe that
although everything was going to be lost, at least this much has been
The Vachanãmrut

134

saved! In the same way, even if extreme misery is due to befall one,
that misery would certainly decrease slightly if one were to keep the
refuge of God. The jiva, however, fails to understand this. It is as if
one who is to be executed on a shuli gets away with the suffering of a
mere pinprick. Such is the difference.
16

“There is a story illustrating this: Many thieves lived in a
particular village. One of these thieves often kept the company of a
sãdhu. Once, while the thief was on his way to visit the sãdhu, a
thorn pierced his foot, penetrating it completely. As a result, his foot
became swollen and he was unable to accompany the other thieves to
steal. The other thieves, who went to steal, broke into a king’s
treasury and escaped with a great deal of money, which they duly
shared among themselves. Naturally, a lot of money came their way.
On hearing this news, the parents, wife and relatives of the thief who
used to sit with the sãdhu and who was injured scolded him:
‘Because you went to the sãdhu instead of going to steal, we lost out.
The thieves who did go to steal returned with a lot of money.’
Meanwhile, the king’s army arrived, arrested all of the thieves and
took them away to be executed on a shuli. The injured thief was also
caught and consigned to execution. However, all of the villagers and
the sãdhu bore witness, ‘This particular man was not involved in the
theft as he had been hurt by a thorn.’ The thief was thus released.

17

“In the same way, if a person who practises satsang were to face
the suffering of being executed on a shuli, it would be reduced to the
pain of a mere thorn-prick. After all, I have asked of Rãmãnand
Swãmi, ‘If your satsangi is destined to suffer the distress inflicted by
the sting of one scorpion, may the distress of the stings of millions
and millions of scorpions befall each and every pore of my body; but
no pain should afflict your satsangi. Moreover, if the begging bowl is
written in the prãrabdha of your satsangi, may that begging bowl
come to Me; but on no account should your satsangi suffer from the
lack of food or clothing. Please grant Me these two boons.’ I asked
this of Rãmãnand Swãmi, and he happily granted it to Me.
Therefore, even if worldly miseries are destined to befall anyone
practising satsang, they do not.

18

“Anyhow, material objects are all temporary. So if a person
practises satsang entertaining desires for such objects, then doubts
will certainly cloud his faith. Therefore, other than the desire for the

The Vachanãmrut

135

liberation of one’s own jiva, one should practise satsang having no
desires whatsoever. Only then will unfaltering faith develop.”
19

This is only a portion of the detailed discourse delivered by Shriji
Mahãrãj.
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-70 || 70 ||

Gadhadã I-71
God Manifests with His Akshardhãm
1

On the evening of Chaitra vadi 4, Samvat 1876 [2 April 1820],
Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot which had been
placed on the platform in front of the west-facing medi in Dãdã
Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was wearing a white khes and
had covered Himself with a white cotton cloth. He had also tied a
white feto around His head. At that time, Muktãnand Swãmi and
some sãdhus were singing devotional songs to the accompaniment of
musical instruments, while other sãdhus as well as devotees from
various places had gathered before Him in an assembly.

2

Then Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Please conclude the devotional songs
for now and begin a question-answer session amongst yourselves.”

3

Thereupon Somlã Khãchar asked, “God forgives all of the
mistakes of His devotees, but which one mistake does God not
forgive?”

4

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “God forgives all other mistakes, but He
does not forgive the mistake of spiting a devotee of God. Therefore,
one should never harm a devotee of God in any way whatsoever.
Furthermore, of all mistakes made against God, to denounce the
form of God is a very grave mistake. One should never make this
mistake. One who does do so commits a sin more serious than the
five grave sins10.

5

“Refuting the form of God is nothing more than understanding
God, who eternally has a form, to be formless. In fact, God, who is
Purushottam, forever resides with a divine form in His Akshardhãm,
whose divine light is comparable to that of millions of suns and
moons. Countless millions of brahmarup muktas serve the holy feet
of that God. That God, also known as Parabrahma Purushottam,
Himself manifests on earth out of compassion, for the liberation of
the jivas. When He manifests, all entities that He accepts become
The Vachanãmrut

136

brahmarupi . The three bodies, i.e., sthul, sukshma and kãran; the
three states, i.e., waking, dream and deep sleep; the ten indriyas; the
five prãns; etc., were all apparent in avatãrs such as Rãm, Krishna,
etc. Although all of them appear to be like those of ordinary humans,
in reality, they are all brahmaii , not mãyik. Therefore, one should
never refute the form of God.”
6

Mãtrã Dhãdhal then asked, “What is the characteristic of
jealousy?”

7

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “One who is jealous of someone cannot
tolerate that person benefiting in any way; in fact, he would be
pleased if misery befalls that person. That is the characteristic of
jealousy.”

8

Thereafter, Shriji Mahãrãj asked the munis, “One who has faith
in the manifest form of God, worships God, and behaves in
accordance with the niyams of Satsang will attain liberation; that is
the way of Satsang. What, however, are the methods of liberation
according to the scriptures? The meanings of the Vedas are indeed
very difficult to understand; thus they are not narrated in spiritual
discourses.
However, the Shrimad Bhãgwat Purãn and the
Mahãbhãrat contain the message of the Vedas and are simpler to
understand; and so, they are widely narrated in public spiritual
discourses. Please explain, then, how one can attain liberation as
explained in the scriptures. Also, bear in mind that Shankarãchãrya
has propounded that God is formless, whereas Rãmãnujãchãrya and
other ãchãryas have propounded that God has a form. Therefore,
please base your answer on the principles of the scriptures.”

9

Using scriptural references, the munis then denounced the view
that God is formless, and propounded the view that liberation is
possible only by worship of a God with a form.

10

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj commented, “I Myself also accept that
view, but I would like to ask you a question regarding this.
Purushottam Bhagwãn transcends the formless Aksharbrahma and
eternally has a form. Now, if a person who has attained that God on
this earth still cherishes a desire to see Brahmapur, Golok,
i ‘brahmarup’ should be understood as ‘divine’ in this context.
ii ‘brahma’ should be understood as ‘divine’ in this context.

The Vachanãmrut

137

Vaikunth, Shwetdwip and the other abodes of God, can he be said to
have faith in God, or not?”
11

The munis replied, “Despite having attained God, he who
constantly feels in his mind, ‘Only when I see Akshardhãm and the
other abodes, or see the light of millions and millions of suns is my
liberation attained,’ does not have absolute faith.”

12

Shriji Mahãrãj countered by asking, “What sin has he
committed in entertaining a desire to see Brahmapur, the other
abodes and the form of Brahma that you disqualify his faith?”

13

The munis replied, “Why should a person who believes that
liberation is attained by the mere darshan of the manifest form of
God harbour a dislike for Brahmapur, Golok and other abodes? After
all, they do belong to God. However, without God, he would have no
desire for them.”

14

Shriji Mahãrãj further questioned, “Those abodes and the
attendants residing in them are formed of chaitanya and transcend
mãyã; so what flaw is there in them that one should not desire to see
them? Also, what about God who is manifest on this earth? How do
you view His attendants, who are in fact mortal, and the houses He
lives in, which are perishable?”

15

The munis replied, “We understand those houses to be like
Brahmapur and the other abodes; and we understand those
attendants to be brahmarup.”

16

Shriji Mahãrãj then said, “Brahmapur and the attendants of
God residing in Brahmapur are immortal and imperishable, whereas
the houses and attendants of this Mrutyulok are perishable. How
can you possibly equate the two?”

17

Finally, Nityãnand Swãmi requested, “Mahãrãj, You will have
to answer that question.”

18

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “When God incarnates for
the purpose of granting liberation to the jivas, He is always
accompanied by His Akshardhãm, His attendants – who are formed
of chaitanya – and all of His divine powers; but they are not perceived
by others. Nevertheless, when some devotee acquires a divine vision
during samãdhi, he does see divine light equivalent to countless
millions of suns in the form of God. Together with that form, he also
sees countless millions of muktas and also Akshardhãm itself.
Therefore, all of these do accompany God. Despite all of this, though,
The Vachanãmrut

138

God only accepts the service of His own, earthly devotees. He stays
in His devotees’ houses made of mud, clay and stone. He lovingly
accepts whatever those devotees offer Him, be it incense, an oil lamp,
food, clothes, or anything else. He does so for the purpose of elevating
those earthly attendants to the ranks of divine attendants. All of
those objects that a devotee offers to God assume a divine form in the
abode of God. Moreover, that devotee also attains a divine form and
attains those divine objects there. In this way, God accepts all of the
offerings offered by His earthly devotees in order to allow them to
experience everlasting bliss. Therefore, a devotee of God should
realise that the form of God along with His Akshardhãm is present
on this earth, and he should also explain this fact to others.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-71 || 71 ||

Gadhadã I-72
Faith Coupled with the Knowledge of God’s
Greatness
1

On Chaitra vadi 11, Samvat 1876 [9 April 1820], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting facing east on a large, decorated
cot on the veranda outside the north-facing rooms near the mandir of
Shri Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He
was dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, an assembly of
munis as well as devotees from various places had gathered before
Him.

2

Then Muktãnand Swãmi said, “Mahãrãj, yesterday you had a
very nice talk with Dãdã Khãchar. All of us very much wish to hear
that talk.”

3

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “If a devotee of God has faith in
God coupled with the knowledge of His greatness and also thoroughly
realises the greatness of the sãdhus and satsangis, then even if that
devotee’s karmas as well as kãl happen to be unfavourable, both kãl
and karma combined are incapable of harming him due to the
extreme force of his bhakti. On the other hand, a person lacking
faith in God and His Sant does not benefit in any way, even if God
wishes to do good for that person.

4

“One who oppresses the meek does not benefit in any way either.
In fact, Bhishmapitã has said to King Yudhishthir in the
The Vachanãmrut

139

Mahãbhãrat, ‘If you oppress the meek, you and your descendants will
be burnt to ashes.’ Therefore, whether he be a devotee of God or not,
no meek person should even slightly be pained. Moreover, if one does
hurt the meek, not only does one not benefit in any way, but one also
incurs a sin equivalent to the sin of killing a Brãhmin.
5

“In the same way, the sin incurred by making false allegations
against someone is also equivalent to killing a Brãhmin. Even if the
allegations happen to be true, one should constructively advise the
person in private, but in no way should he be publicly humiliated.

6

“Similarly, one who forces five categories of women to lapse in
their dharma also incurs the sin of killing a Brãhmin. What are
these five categories of women? First, a woman who has sought one’s
refuge; second, one’s own wife who does not desire intimacy on days of
observance or on days of fasting; third, a woman who observes the
vow of fidelity; fourth, a widow; and fifth, a woman who has placed
her trust in one. If a person commits adultery with these five
categories of women, he incurs the sin of killing a Brãhmin. Of these
five categories, if a widow’s mind wavers towards immorality, she
should be inspired to observe dharma.”i

7

Thereafter, the munis began to sing amorous devotional songs of
God. Hearing them, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “When God assumes a body
for the sake of the liberation of the jivas, all of His actions are like
those of humans. On seeing those actions, a devotee of God
understands them to be divine actions, whereas a non-believer or a
weak-minded devotee perceives faults in them. For example, when
Shukji narrated the Rãs-panchãdhyãyi, King Parikshit harboured a
doubt, and so asked, ‘God had manifested to establish the order of
dharma.
Why, then, did he commit a breach of dharma by
associating with others’ wives?’ In this manner, Parikshit perceived
a fault in God. Shukji, on the other hand, thoughtfully began
singing praises of God, explaining that Kãmdev had conquered
Brahmã and other deities and brought them under his control. This
had greatly inflated Kãmdev’s conceit. To vanquish that conceit, God
challenged Kãmdev. Just as a powerful king gives his own weapons
to his enemy prior to fighting him, similarly, God also gave his
enemy, Kãmdev, the necessary ‘ammunition’ for fighting beforehand.
i This was the talk given the day before to Dãdã Khãchar.

The Vachanãmrut

140

What was that ‘ammunition’? Well, the force of Kãmdev manifests
in the company of women, and that force is also greater during the
nights of the pre-winter season. In addition, amorous gestures of
women, listening to seductive words, seeing the beauty of women,
and touching women greatly increase the force of Kãmdev. After
giving all of this as ‘ammunition’ to Kãmdev, Shri Krishna Bhagwãn
conquered Kãmdev and continuously remained an urdhvaretã like a
brahmachãri. In this way, he vanquished Kãmdev’s conceit. No one
except God possesses such transcendental powers. It was after
realising this immense power of God that Shukji extolled the divine
actions and incidents of God. However, as King Parikshit failed to
understand this, he perceived a fault in God.
8

“However, someone may ask you, ‘Being paramhansas, why do
you sing such amorous devotional songs?’ In that case, you should
tell that person, ‘If we do not sing amorous devotional songs, and
instead perceive faults in the amorous actions of God, then we would
also join the ranks of King Parikshit and other nãstik non-believers.
But we do not wish to join the likes of those who are non-believers.
After all, Shukji, considered to be the guru of all paramhansas,
himself extolled the amorous sports of God. Therefore, we must also
certainly do likewise.’

9

“Nevertheless, when Purushottam Bhagwãn, who transcends
both the perishable and the imperishable, assumes a human form
and travels in the brahmãnd for the liberation of the jivas, His
actions are just like those of all humans. Just as humans possess
mãyik swabhãvs such as lust, anger, avarice, infatuation, matsar,
jealousy, defeat, victory, fear, grief, arrogance, desires, cravings, etc.,
God also exhibits the same swabhãvs Himself, but they are all for the
liberation of the jivas. So, a true devotee extols the divine actions of
God and attains the highest state of enlightenment, whereas a nonbeliever perceives faults in them.

10

“In fact, just as God is the ãtmã of the perishable, He is also the
ãtmã of Aksharbrahma, who transcends Prakruti-Purush. With His
own powers, God supports both the perishable and the imperishable,
yet He Himself is distinct from them both. Furthermore, the
greatness of God is such that within the pore of His each and every
hair, countless millions of brahmãnds appear as mere sub-atomic
particles. Only when that vast God becomes like a human for the
sake of the liberation of the jivas do they have an opportunity to serve
The Vachanãmrut

141

Him. If He were to remain exactly the same size as He is, then even
the ruling deities of this brahmãnd, i.e., Brahmã and others, would
be incapable of doing His darshan or serving Him. What, then, can
be said of mere humans? Consider, for example, the vadvãnal fire
that dwells in the ocean. Despite consuming the waters of the ocean,
it is so vast that even the water of the ocean itself cannot extinguish
it. If we wished to light an oil lamp in our homes and that vadvãnal
fire were to enter our homes, instead of enjoying the light of the oil
lamp, we would all be burnt and reduced to ashes. However, if that
same fire were to assume the form of an oil lamp, its light would
provide joy – even though the oil lamp is that very same fire. The oil
lamp is so weak that it could be easily extinguished by blowing on it
or smothering it by hand. Nevertheless, only it can provide comfort
to us, whereas the vadvãnal fire cannot.
11

“In the same way, God may appear to be as powerless as a
human, but only through that form can countless jivas attain
liberation. The jivas are incapable of even doing darshan of His
form, within whose each and every hair reside countless millions of
brahmãnds. So, liberation is not possible through that form. Thus,
all actions God performs after assuming a human form are worthy of
being extolled. One should not doubt, ‘Despite being God, why does
He do this?’ In fact, to realise all of God’s actions and incidents as
redemptive is the very dharma of a devotee, and only one who
understands this can be called a perfect devotee of God.”

12

Thereafter, Kãkãbhãi of the village Rojkã, asked, “What are the
characteristics of a person who merely has faith in God, without
realising His greatness? Also, what are the characteristics of a
person who has faith in God coupled with the knowledge of His
greatness?”

13

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “A person with only faith still harbours
doubts: ‘Although I have attained God, will I attain liberation or not?’
On the other hand, a person with faith coupled with the knowledge of
God’s greatness believes, ‘From the very day I had the darshan of
God, my liberation has been guaranteed. In fact, liberation is also
assured to anyone who devoutly does my darshan or accepts my
advice. How, then, can there be any doubt regarding my own
liberation? I am indeed absolutely fulfilled. Furthermore, whichever
spiritual endeavours I do perform, I perform solely to please God.’

The Vachanãmrut

142

One with such understanding should be known to have faith in God
coupled with the knowledge of His greatness.”
14

Again, Kãkãbhãi asked, “What are the characteristics of the
three types of devotees of God – the best, the intermediate and the
lowest?”

15

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “The best devotee believes himself to be
the ãtmã, distinct from his body. He does not associate the qualities
of the body – being jad, full of misery, perishable, impure, etc. – with
the ãtmã; nor does he associate the qualities of the ãtmã – being
uncuttable, unpierceable, imperishable, etc. – with the body. He sees
the jivãtmã residing in his body, as well as the Paramãtmã dwelling
within his ãtmã. Not only that, he sees the ãtmãs residing in the
bodies of others as well. Yet, despite having become so capable, he
realises God and the Sant of God to be superior to ãtmã-realisation
and harbours not even the slightest conceit of the realisation he has
attained. A person with such characteristics is said to be the best
devotee.

16

“In comparison, a person who, despite having knowledge of the
ãtmã and faith in God, becomes jealous of devotees of God; and if God
were to insult him, develops jealousy towards God as well, feeling,
‘Even though God is so great, why is He treating me so, despite no
fault of my own?’ – should be considered to be an average devotee.

17

“Finally, a person who has faith in God but no ãtmã-realisation;
has affection for God as well as for the affairs of this world; and
experiences joy and grief in the affairs of this world – should be
considered to be the lowest of the three types of devotees.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-72 || 72 ||

Gadhadã I-73
Conquering Lust; Becoming Free of Worldly Desires
1

On the night of Chaitra vadi Amãs, Samvat 1876 [12 April
1820], Swãmi Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on the veranda
outside the north-facing room of His residence in Dãdã Khãchar’s
darbãr in Gadhadã. He was wearing a white khes and had covered
Himself with a white cotton cloth. He had also tied a white feto
around His head. At that time, four senior sãdhus, including
The Vachanãmrut

143

Muktãnand Swãmi, along with some fifty other devotees had
gathered before Him.
2

Then Gopãlãnand Swãmi asked, “What is the nature of lust?”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj answered, “Semen alone is the nature of lust.”

4

Thereupon Gopãlãnand Swãmi raised a doubt, “Semen is one of
the seven basic constituents of the bodyi . How, then, can it alone be
called the nature of lust? Also, how exactly is that semen produced?”

5

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “The mind resides in the manovahã
nãdi. Whenever a thought related to women arises in the mind,
semen is churned from the body, and after collecting in the
manovahã nãdi, it is discharged through the genitals – just as ghee
surfaces from yoghurt when it is churned by a churning rod. One
whose semen is not discharged through the genitals is known as an
urdhvaretã and a perfect brahmachãri.
When Shri Krishna
Bhagwãn associated with the gopis during the rãs episode, he did not
allow the discharge of semen. For this reason, he was known as an
urdhvaretã brahmachãri and had thus conquered lust. Therefore,
semen alone is the nature of lust; one who has conquered semen has
conquered lust.”

6

Gopãlãnand Swãmi asked again, “When the body is burnt after
death, its seven constituents are burnt along with it. Therefore, if
semen alone is the nature of lust, surely then, by the burning of
semen along with the body, lust should also be burnt. Why, then,
does lust arise when the jiva enters another body?”

7

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “Semen is retained in the sukshma body.
Moreover, it is because of the sukshma body that the sthul body is
produced. When a ghost – which is mainly composed of a sukshma
body – from its own sukshma body, enters into the sthul body of
another man and associates with a woman, that woman conceives a
child by that ghost. Thus, semen is definitely retained in the
sukshma body.”

8

Gopãlãnand Swãmi questioned further, “Shivji was an
urdhvaretã, yet on seeing Mohini, semen was discharged. This
i The seven basic constituents of the body are: (1) ras – bodily fluids; (2) rakta –

blood; (3) mãns – muscle, (4) med – fat; (5) asthi – bones, (6) majjã – marrow;
(7) shukra – semen.

The Vachanãmrut

144

implies that as long as there is semen in the body, it is sure to be
discharged whenever one associates with a woman in the waking or
dream state. So then, as long as there is semen in the body, how can
one be called a perfect celibate?”
9

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “That can be said to be a fault in
Shivji’s yogic powers. A person whose semen is discharged in the
waking or dream state by the thought of a woman cannot be called a
staunch brahmachãri. That is why in this whole world Narnãrãyan
Rishi is the only one who has firm brahmacharya. Since we have
accepted the refuge of that Narnãrãyan Rishi, by his grace, we shall
also gradually become perfect celibates like him – by worshipping
him.

10

“Yogis endeavour in many ways to burn the semen which
remains in the body. Shri Krishna Bhagwãn, however, maintained
perfect brahmacharya even amidst the company of women. Such
powers are only present in God; no one else is capable of remaining
uninfluenced like that. Therefore, other yogis should endeavour to
avoid thinking of women in both the waking state and the dream
state.”

11

Shuk Muni then asked, “In Dwãrikã, Shri Krishna Bhagwãn
had 16,108 wives. It is said that he had ten sons and one daughter
by each wife. How should one understand this?”

12

Shriji Mahãrãj clarified, “The incidents of Dwãrikã are one
thing, and the incidents of Vraj are another. In Dwãrikã, Shri
Krishna Bhagwãn had adopted the principle of Sãnkhya. A follower
of the Sãnkhya principle believes his own self to be distinct from the
mind, body and indriyas. While performing all actions, he does not
regard himself as being the doer of those actions, nor does he
experience either joy or grief from those actions. That was the
principle adopted by Shri Krishna Bhagwãn there; therefore he was
said to be uninfluenced. The Sãnkhya principle adopted by Shri
Krishna Bhagwãn in Dwãrikã is the very same Sãnkhya principle
observed by kings such as Janak, who worshipped God as
householders. In the same way, Shri Krishna Bhagwãn was also a
householder and was known as the king of Dwãrikã. Therefore,
because he followed the Sãnkhya principle, he remained uninfluenced
as well.

13

“In Vrundãvan, however, Shri Krishna Bhagwãn had adopted
the principle of Yoga, by which he maintained his vow of perfect
The Vachanãmrut

145

brahmacharya despite associating with women. At that time, he
displayed the powers of Narnãrãyan Rishi within himself. In the
Shrimad Bhãgwat, Kapildev explains to Devhuti, ‘No one except
Narnãrãyan Rishi is capable of overcoming my mãyã in the form of
women.’
But, Shri Krishna Bhagwãn conquered lust while
associating with women.
14

“Now consider the following incident: When Durvãsã Rishi came
and Shri Krishna Bhagwãn began sending all of the gopis with
dishes filled with food for him, the gopis asked, ‘How shall we cross
the Yamunãji river?’

15

“At that time, Shri Krishna Bhagwãn said, ‘Tell Yamunãji that
if Shri Krishna is forever a brahmachãri, then make way for us.’
When the gopis told this to Yamunãji, it made way for them.

16

“After feeding the rishi, all of the gopis asked him, ‘The
Yamunãji is in our way. How shall we return home?’

17

“The rishi then asked, ‘How did you come?’

18

“The gopis explained, ‘We told Yamunãji that if Shri Krishna is
forever a brahmachãri, then make way for us. So it made way for
us. But how shall we return home now?’

19

“Durvãsã Rishi then said, ‘Tell Yamunãji that if Durvãsã Rishi
is forever fasting, then make way for us.’ Thereafter, when the gopis
said this to Yamunãji, it made way for them. Seeing this, the gopis
were extremely surprised. However, they were unable to realise the
greatness of Shri Krishna Bhagwãn or the rishi.

20

“Shri Krishna Bhagwãn played with the gopis while
maintaining his vow of perfect brahmacharya and was therefore still
a brahmachãri. Durvãsã Rishi also united his ãtmã with Shri
Krishna Bhagwãn – the ãtmã of all – and although he ate all of the
food offered by the gopis, he was still forever fasting, because in
reality, he had fed all of the food to God. Thus, the actions of the
extremely great cannot be comprehended.

21

“If one looks for followers of the Sãnkhya principle, one could find
thousands. However, to be an urdhvaretã by way of yogic powers is
only possible for Narnãrãyan.
In addition, a true devotee of
Narnãrãyan can also gradually develop firm brahmacharya by the
power of his worship, but others cannot.

The Vachanãmrut

146

22

“Furthermore, if semen is discharged through the genitals in the
waking or dream state, one cannot be called a brahmachãri.
Nevertheless, a person who observes eight-fold renunciation of women
is walking on the path of brahmacharya; so with time, by the grace
of Narnãrãyan, he will gradually become a firm brahmachãri.

23

“When I was young, I had heard that semen is also released
through one’s sweat. So in order to retain My semen, I learnt two
types of jal-basti, and also kunjar-kriyã. In order to conquer lust, I
learnt many yogic ãsanas as well. When I slept at night, I slept in
the posture of gorakh-ãsan to prevent the discharge of semen even in
the dream state. To conquer lust, I endeavoured so vigorously that
My body stopped sweating, and I no longer felt either the cold or the
heat. Then, when I came to Rãmãnand Swãmi, he tried to make Me
sweat by pasting ãval leaves all over My body. Even then, My body
would not sweat. So, conquering lust is the most difficult of all
spiritual endeavours. Nevertheless, a person who has the firm
strength of the upãsanã of God, has become absolutely free from
desires for vishays, and is firmly resolute in remaining free of worldly
desires becomes free of lust by the grace of God.”

24

Thereafter Nityãnand Swãmi asked, “What is the method of
becoming free of worldly desires? Is it listening to such talks, or is it
vairãgya?”

25

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “Vairãgya alone cannot last; ultimately,
it is destroyed. Therefore, after developing knowledge of the ãtmã
and thorough gnãn of God’s form, one should think, ‘I am the ãtmã,
characterised by eternal existence, consciousness and bliss, whereas
the body and the brahmãnd are mãyik and perishable. How can they
compare to me? Moreover, my Ishtadev is Purushottam Bhagwãn,
who transcends even Akshar – the supporter of countless millions of
brahmãnds. I have the firm refuge of that God.’ Vairãgya cultivated
from such thoughts is said to be compounded with gnãn. It is this
vairãgya that is never destroyed. For example, a burning flame is
extinguished when water is poured over it. However, the vadvãnal
fire that rests in the ocean cannot be extinguished even by the waters
of the ocean itself. Similarly, vairãgya compounded with gnãn is like
the vadvãnal fire and the fire of lightning – it is inextinguishable.
Without that gnãn though, other forms of vairãgya cannot be
trusted.

The Vachanãmrut

147

26

“My vairãgya is like that of the fire of lightning and the
vadvãnal fire. This nature of Mine is known by those who have
stayed extremely close to Me. However, those who remain far from
Me are unable to realise My nature. Furthermore, this Mulji
Brahmachãri may appear to be naïve, yet he thoroughly knows My
nature, realising, ‘Mahãrãj is as aloof as ãkãsh. He has no prejudices
against or in favour of anyone.’ Because he knows My nature as
being so, he possesses virtues like those of God. Moreover, the
antaryãmi God residing within all explains to the minds of all men
and women, ‘There is no fault whatsoever in this Brahmachãri.’

27

“The means of acquiring such virtuous qualities is as follows:
Whoever believes the great Purush to be absolutely free of flaws
becomes totally flawless himself. If, however, a person perceives
flaws in the great Purush, that person’s intellect becomes polluted,
and enemies – i.e., lust, anger, etc. – all come to dwell within his
heart. As a result, the heart of that person who perceives faults in
the Satpurush is gravely troubled by disturbing thoughts. Although
he may practise satsang, he never ceases to be unhappy.

28

“Those who are wise realise all My characteristics by staying
close to Me. They realise, ‘Mahãrãj has no affection for any object in
this world that can arouse infatuation – wealth, women, ornaments,
food and drink, etc. In fact, Mahãrãj remains dejected from all these
things. When, out of compassion, He allows some person to sit near
Him or talks to him of gnãn, it is purely out of compassion for the
liberation of the jiva.’ On the other hand, those who are fools –
whether they stay near or far – cannot understand My nature as
such.

29

“These discourses can only be understood by a person who has
ãtmã-realisation, who – beholding the form of God within his ãtmã –
offers bhakti to Him and who does not forsake the worship of God
even after becoming brahmarup. Therefore, after developing ãtmãrealisation and understanding the greatness of God’s form, no desire
for any object remains. Once worldly desires are eradicated, a person
may experience pain and pleasure according to the prãrabdha of his
body, but the indriyas no longer remain sharp.

30

“The indriyas are the spokes of the manomay chakra. They
become blunt only by the complete realisation of Brahma and
Parabrahma – who transcends Brahma. For example, if a person
whose teeth have become very sensitive as a result of sucking lemons
The Vachanãmrut

148

has to chew some chanã, he could never chew them. If he were
extremely hungry, he would at most swallow them, but he would be
unable to chew them. Similarly, a person who has thoroughly
realised the greatness of God and the ãtmã feels no joy whatsoever in
any of the pleasures of the vishays of any realm. While the
prãrabdha of the body persists, he may indulge in food, drink and
other objects, but he would do so in the manner of a person with
sensitised teeth swallowing whole chanã.
31

“To eradicate worldly desires, however, is indeed an extremely
difficult task. In fact, they remain even after mastering samãdhi.
After attaining samãdhi, there is no way a person can return from
the form of Brahma back into his body. Yet, if he does return, it is
because of one of three reasons: Firstly, he returns to his body from
samãdhi if he harbours desires for worldly pleasures. Or, if someone
is extremely powerful, he can enter into samãdhi and return to the
body according to his own will. Lastly, if there is another person who
is much more powerful than oneself, then that person can bring one
back into the body from samãdhi. These are the three ways of
returning to the body from samãdhi.

32

“When samãdhi occurs, a person has the darshan of Brahma
and sees the divine light of Brahma to be like that of countless
millions of suns. If, at that time, that person does not have much
understanding, he regards the form of the manifest Purushottam
Bhagwãn to be inferior and believes Brahma to be superior, thereby
committing a breach of upãsanã. That is why firm faith should be
developed in the manifest form, because only then can all things be
accomplished. I have also firmly resolved that I shall not allow any
flaw whatsoever to remain in anyone who sincerely surrenders his
mind unto Me, thereby not allowing even a little distance to remain
between us.”

33

Thereupon Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “What are the
characteristics of a person who has surrendered his mind, and what
are the characteristics of a person who has not surrendered his
mind?”

34

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “If a person who has surrendered his
mind to God is unable to be present while the talks of God are ongoing, or for the darshan of God, he experiences intense remorse in
his heart. Whenever he listens to the talks of God and does the
darshan of God, his love for God continually increases, but never does
The Vachanãmrut

149

his mind recede from those talks and darshan. Moreover, when God
gives a command to someone to stay far away, a person who has
surrendered his mind would think to himself, ‘If that command were
given to me, I would gladly go to Burãnpur or Kãshi, or anywhere
else for that matter.’ A person who remains happy living according
to the wishes of God in this way is near to Me, even if he is a
thousand miles away.
35

“On the other hand, a person who has not surrendered his mind
in this way is as good as being hundreds of thousands of miles away,
even though he may be staying very close to Me. In fact, I am afraid
of even giving advice to a person who has not surrendered his mind to
Me, as I fear, ‘Will he accept it positively or adversely?’ These are
the characteristics of a person who has surrendered his mind and of a
person who has not.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-73 || 73 ||

Gadhadã I-74
Understanding Is Measured in Times of Hardship
1

On the morning of Vaishãkh sudi 11, Samvat 1876 [24 April
1820], Swãmi Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large,
decorated cot on the platform under the neem tree in front of the
mandir of Shri Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in
Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, an
assembly of munis as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him.

2

Shriji Mahãrãj then began, “The extent of one’s vairãgya and
one’s understanding can be measured only when one encounters
vishays, or in times of some hardship, but not otherwise. That being
so, what can be said about situations of extreme prosperity or
hardship? For example, everyone must have realised the state of
their own antahkarans during the minor difficulty that recently
befell Dãdã Khãchar.”

3

Thereupon Muktãnand Swãmi commented, “It is but natural
that in one’s heart, one sides with God’s devotees. That too, with the
understanding that if the Satsang fellowship flourishes, many people
will benefit; but if the Satsang fellowship suffers a setback in any
way, no one will benefit. That is why joy and grief are experienced.”
The Vachanãmrut

150

4

Shriji Mahãrãj then explained, “We are the servants of Shri
Krishnanãrãyan; so we should be pleased with whatever pleases
Him. If it is His wish, then Satsang will flourish; and if He wishes
for it to decrease, then it will decrease. Moreover, if God seats us on
an elephant, we should remain happy by sitting on an elephant; and
if He seats us on a donkey, then we should remain happy by sitting
on a donkey; but we should not harbour the slightest affection for
anything except the holy feet of God. Thus, in whatever way Satsang
develops according to His wish, we should remain content. If He so
wishes, let everyone in the world become satsangis; or if He so
wishes, let all satsangis cease to remain satsangis. But in no way
should we harbour any joy or grief in our minds, because everything
happens by the will of God. So, just as a dry leaf is blown in the air
according to the direction of the wind, we should also remain
dependent on Him and joyfully worship God, not allowing any
frustration to enter our minds.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-74 || 74 ||

Gadhadã I-75
Redeeming Seventy-One Generations
1

On Vaishãkh vadi 11, Samvat 1876 [8 May 1820], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot under the
neem tree in front of the mandir of Shri Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã
Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was wearing a garland of yellow
flowers around His neck and was dressed entirely in white clothes.
At that time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees from various
places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Surã Khãchar asked, “It is said that 71 generationsi
of a family that contains a devotee of God are redeemed. But many in
that lineage may even be enemies of the Sant and of God. So in what
way are they redeemed?”

i Other interpretations of the original text, which are also in accordance with the

Hindu scriptures, include 21 and 101 generations. The 21 generations include
the current generation, the 10 previous generations and the 10 following
generations.

The Vachanãmrut

151

3

Shriji Mahãrãj answered, “Devhuti harboured profound love
towards Kardam Rishi as her husband, yet she was redeemed
because of her affection for him. The 50 daughters of King Mãndhãtã
who married Saubhari Rishi were attracted to him by his handsome
appearance. Although their affection for Saubhari was born of lust,
still they all attained liberation like Saubhari Rishi himself.
Therefore, if all the members of a family in which there is a devotee
believe, ‘We are indeed very fortunate to have a devotee of God in our
family,’ and keep affection for the devotee with such an
understanding of his greatness, then all of the members of that
family will attain liberation. Even if the devotee’s forefathers who
have died and have gone to swarg realise, ‘We are indeed very
fortunate to have a devotee of God in our family,’ and they also keep
affection for the devotee, then those forefathers will attain liberation
as well.

4

“However, a person who keeps animosity towards a devotee of
God does not attain liberation. As his hatred towards the devotee
increases, his mind becomes more and more polluted. In fact, when
he dies, he falls into the same pit of narak as that entered by a person
who has committed the five grave sins10. Thus, all those who have
affection for a devotee of God, regardless of whether they are family
members or not, attain liberation.”

5

Thereafter Nãjã Jogiyã asked, “Suppose there is one devotee of
God with resolute faith and another with only a little faith. Although
outwardly they both appear to be good, how can the two be
recognised?”

6

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “One who has precise gnãn of the
nature of the ãtmã, firm vairãgya, as well as perfect bhakti and
swadharma should be known to have perfect faith. Even if one of
these four factors is lacking, then despite having faith, it is still
without the knowledge of God’s greatness. If all four factors are
totally present, then that should be known as faith in God coupled
with the knowledge of His greatness.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-75 || 75 ||

The Vachanãmrut

152

Gadhadã I-76
An Angry Person, a Jealous Person,
a Deceitful Person and an Egotistical Person
1

On the sudi Ekãdashi of the first Jyeshtha, Samvat 1876 [23
May 1820], Swãmi Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was seated in His
residence in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed
entirely in white clothes. At that time, some senior sãdhus were
seated before Him.

2

Addressing them, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “There are four types of
people I do not get along with, even if they happen to be devotees of
God: an angry person, a jealous person, a deceitful person, and an
egotistical person. Of these, both anger and jealousy are dependent
on egotism. Furthermore, I can never believe a lustful person to be a
satsangi. In fact, even if such a person happens to be in the Satsang
fellowship, he is as good as a non-believer.”

3

Continuing, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “A true satsangi is a person
who has absolutely no flaws in the observance of the five religious
vows4 and who remains totally undisturbed until the end of his life
regardless of whatever stern commands I may impose – even if I
compel him to forsake his preferences and enforce My own. In fact, I
effortlessly and naturally develop affection for such a devotee. On the
other hand, I cannot develop affection for a devotee without such
qualities, even if I try. This is because My nature is such that I can
only develop affection for a person who possesses in his heart such
perfect bhakti for God.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-76 || 76 ||

Gadhadã I-77
Not Invalidating Dharma under the Pretext of Gnãn
1

On the Amãs of the second Jyeshtha, Samvat 1876 [10 July
1820], Swãmi Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large,
decorated cot on the veranda outside the west-facing rooms in front of
the mandir of Shri Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in
Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, an
assembly of munis as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him.
The Vachanãmrut

153

2

In the assembly, the munis were engaged in a question-answer
dialogue amongst themselves. During the dialogue, a muni, out of
misunderstanding, began to invalidate dharma on the basis of his
faith in God.

3

Hearing this, Shriji Mahãrãj commented, “A person who
forsakes dharma under the pretext of the gnãn of God should be
considered to be demonic. The form of God possesses countless
redemptive qualities8, which Pruthvi has described to Dharma in the
first canto of the Shrimad Bhãgwat. Therefore, a person who has
accepted the refuge of God acquires these redemptive virtues.
Moreover, a person who has faith in God also acquires the 30
attributes of a sãdhu11 described in the 11th canto of the Shrimad
Bhãgwat. Therefore, one who does not possess the 30 attributes of a
sãdhu should not be considered to be a true sãdhu. Conversely, a
person who does have faith in God definitely does acquire the
redemptive virtues of God within his heart. When these virtues of
God are acquired by a sãdhu, he also acquires the 30 attributes of a
sãdhu. From today onwards, then, whosoever forsakes dharma – in
the form of the five religious vows4 – solely advocating the strength of
bhakti or gnãn, is a blasphemer of the guru and guru’s word.
Anyone who even talks of such a lapse in dharma should be called a
non-believer and told, ‘You have sided with demons, and we shall not
accept it.’ With such words, the talks of that unrighteous person
should be dismissed.”

4

Thereafter, a sãdhu asked, “Mahãrãj, there may be an
extremely staunch devotee of God who suffers great pain and who
babbles meaninglessly at the time of death, whereas a person who
does not seem to be a true devotee appears extremely composed at the
time of his death. In fact, he dies in comfort, realising the immense
glory of God – and even expressing His greatness. What is the
reason behind this? Please explain why a pious person’s death
appears to be unpleasant in comparison to an ordinary person’s
death, which appears to be pleasant?

5

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “A person’s mind is influenced by the
eight factors of place, time, action, company, meditation, mantra,
initiation and scriptures. If these eight factors are pure, the mind
becomes pure; if they are impure, the mind becomes impure.

6

“Also, God’s mãyã inspires the dharmas of the four yugs to
prevail in turn within a person’s heart. If, at the time of death, the
The Vachanãmrut

154

dharma of Satya-yug is prevalent, then death appears very pleasant.
If the dharma of either Tretã-yug or Dwãpar-yug prevails, then death
appears less pleasant. But when the dharma of Kali-yug prevails at
the time of death, then death appears extremely unpleasant. In this
way, the pleasantness and unpleasantness of death is determined by
kãl as well.
7

“The three states – waking, dream and deep sleep – are also
factors. If, at the time of death, the waking state is prevalent, then
even a sinner would die while still being active. If the dream state
prevails at the time of death, then a person dies mumbling somewhat
incoherently, even if he happens to be a devotee of God.
Furthermore, if at the time of death, the deep sleep state is
predominant, then regardless of whether one is a devotee of God or a
non-believer, one passes away unconsciously, unable to say
anything – either good or bad. However, if one dies while thoroughly
realising one’s jivãtmã as transcending these three states and as
being brahmarup, one passes away displaying all the powers of God.
Passing away in such a way – that is, after becoming brahmarup
and displaying such powers – is possible only for devotees of God; it is
not possible for any non-believer. In this way, kãl as well as the
three states determine the pleasantness and unpleasantness apparent
at the time of death.

8

“Nevertheless, even if a non-believer dies speaking normally –
with the waking state being predominant – that does not imply in
any way that he will attain liberation. In fact, regardless of whether
he dies pleasantly or unpleasantly, he goes only to narak.
Conversely, regardless of whether a devotee of God speaks normally,
incoherently or maybe even remains silent at the time of death, he
definitely attains liberation. There is no doubt whatsoever in this
fact. All devotees of God should realise this. Although a devotee of
God appears to be suffering pain when passing away due to factors
such as the dream state, etc., in fact, due to the grace of God, he
experiences great bliss within. So then, even if at the time of his
death a devotee passes away babbling incoherently, no doubts at all
should ever be entertained regarding his liberation.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-77 || 77 ||

The Vachanãmrut

155

Gadhadã I-78
The Predominance of Place, Time, Etc.
1

On Ãshãdh sudi 3, Samvat 1877 [13 July 1820], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on the veranda outside the westfacing rooms in front of the mandir of Shri Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã
Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was wearing a white khes and
had covered Himself with a white cotton cloth. He was also wearing
a white pãgh on His head and a garland of white flowers around His
neck. At that time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees from
various places had gathered before Him.

2

Shriji Mahãrãj then said, “All sãdhus, please listen. I wish to
ask a question.”

3

The sãdhus responded, “Please do ask, Mahãrãj.”

4

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj asked, “If the eight influences of
place, time, action, company, mantra, meditation of the deities,
initiation and scriptures are favourable, they purify one’s mind;
however, if these eight influences are unfavourable, they pollute one’s
mind. But do the sanskãrs of the karmas performed in past lives
have any influence on these eight factors?”

5

The munis answered, “It seems that the karmas of past lives do
play a role. If one’s past karmas are favourable, one is born in a
favourable place; if they are unfavourable, one is born in an
unfavourable place. In the same manner, the other seven factors of
time, actions, etc., are also determined by past karmas. So yes, past
karmas appear to play the predominant role in all of them. The eight
influences of place, time, etc., may be predominant in certain
circumstances, but past karmas are predominant in all
circumstances.”

6

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj questioned, “From what principle in
the scriptures do you claim that past karmas play the predominant
role among all of the influences – from place and time, up to the
deities one worships? Please quote any reference from the scriptures.
After all, only in the Jain scriptures – and not in any other – does one
find the predominance of only karmas. Other scriptures promote
only the predominance of the company of God and His Bhakta.
Moreover, because you advocate the predominance of only past
karmas, are you truly nãstiks superficially disguised as satsangis, or
what? This is because no one except the nãstiks promote the
The Vachanãmrut

156

predominance of karmas. They believe the Vedas, the Shãstras, the
Purãns, and the Mahãbhãrat and other Itihãs scriptures to be false;
they only accept their own scriptures written in the Mãgdhi dialect
as authentic. Thus, it is out of foolishness that they promote karmas
only.
7

“If the eight factors of place, time, etc., vary according to past
karmas, then why has the hundred-feet-deep underground water not
risen to the surface for the many pious kings who have been born in
the region of Mãrvãd? If the influence of place was controlled by past
karmas, then the water-table should rise for people who have
performed good deeds and fall for sinners. This is not the case,
however, because in the region of Mãrvãd, both sinners and pious
people suffer from the problem of water being found deep
underground. In reality, each place does not lose its inherent
characteristics. Thus, place, time, etc., do not vary according to past
karmas.

8

“Therefore, a person who desires his own liberation should not
uphold the predominance of karmas in the way that nãstiks do. If
the eight influences of place, time, etc., are unfavourable, he should
forsake them and seek only favourable influences.

9

“Moreover, just as favourable and unfavourable places exist
outside the body, one’s body can also be a favourable or unfavourable
‘place’. If the ‘place’ – in the form of the body – is favourable when
the jiva resides within it, then redemptive virtues such as nobility,
contentment, compassion, dharma, etc., develop. However, if the
‘place’ – in the form of the body – is unfavourable when the jiva
resides within it, then vices such as lust, anger, avarice, infatuation,
matsar, arrogance, etc., develop instead.

10

“Also, favourable and unfavourable company should be
distinguished as follows: When no distance remains at all between
one and the person whose company is kept, that is known as true
association. Outwardly, even enemies embrace each other, yet their
hearts are hundreds of thousands of miles apart. Such outward
association cannot be called association; only association that is kept
by thought, word and deed can be called association. One should
keep such association – by thought, word and deed – only with God or
His Bhakta, as it leads to the liberation of one’s jiva. But one should
never associate with a sinner.”
The Vachanãmrut

157

11

Then, at midday, Shriji Mahãrãj called all of the young, student
sãdhus near and requested, “All of you student sãdhus, please ask
Me questions.”

12

Thereupon Motã Shivãnand Swãmi asked, “How can a person
who has unwavering faith in God be recognised?”

13

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “A person with unwavering faith in God
regards all actions performed by God as redemptive – whether they
be good or bad. Whether God wins or loses, or at times even runs
away; whether He shows pleasure or grief; in fact, however many
countless kinds of actions a faithful devotee witnesses, he says, ‘All
actions of God are for the sake of liberation.’ If, whenever the devotee
speaks, he speaks in this manner only, then he should be known to
have absolute faith in God.”

14

Thereafter Nirmãnãnand Swãmi asked, “How can a person
prevent the development of a fault-finding attitude towards God and
His sãdhus?”

15

Shriji Mahãrãj answered, “If a person possesses the aforesaid
unwavering faith in God, then he never develops a fault-finding
attitude towards God. Furthermore, when he thinks upon the
greatness of the servants of such a great God, he never perceives
faults in the devotees of God either.”

16

Then Nirmãnãnand Swãmi and Nãnã Pragnãnand Swãmi both
asked, “How can one realise the form of God in all the three states of
waking, dream and deep sleep?”

17

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “If the pure sanskãrs from one’s previous
lives are powerful, then one can constantly see the form of God in all
three states. If one who constantly experiences fear, lust or love for
something can see objects besides God constantly in all three states,
then what is surprising about being able to see God constantly as
well? He can definitely be seen.”

18

Nãnã Shivãnand Swãmi then asked, “How can someone with an
unfaltering foundation in the Satsang fellowship be recognised? That
is the first question. The second question is: How can the enemies –
i.e., egotism, lust, anger, avarice, matsar, jealousy, arrogance, etc. –
be destroyed?”

19

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “A person who is absolutely loyal to
Satsang cannot tolerate in the least someone speaking ill of Satsang.
For example, even though one may have had a disagreement with a
The Vachanãmrut

158

member of one’s family, one would be unable to tolerate anyone
speaking ill of them. Therefore, just as one is loyal to one’s relatives,
if a person is similarly loyal to Satsang, then his foundation in
Satsang is unfaltering.
20

“The answer to the second question is: If one has such loyalty for
Satsang, how can one possibly harbour arrogance, matsar or jealousy
towards the Sant or satsangis? Therefore, all of the inner enemies –
egotism, arrogance, matsar, jealousy, etc. – of a person who is loyal
to Satsang are destroyed. However, if a person does not have such
loyalty for satsangis, and regards satsangis and kusangis as equal,
then however highly he may be regarded in Satsang, he is sure to
ultimately fall from Satsang.”

21

Then Nãnã Ãtmãnand Swãmi asked, “God and His Sant may
boldly tell someone whatever needs to be said, with the faith,
‘Whether he is praised or rebuked, he will not fall from Satsang in
any way.’ How can one earn such trust of God and His Sant? That
is one question. The second question is: How can a person win the
affection of all of the sãdhus, just as he has won the affection of the
sãdhu he is presently staying with?”

22

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “As in the answer to Shivãnand Swãmi’s
question, if a person is extremely loyal to Satsang, God and His Sant
do not hesitate in reprimanding him. They never lack faith in him;
that is, they never feel, ‘If he is reprimanded, he will leave the
Satsang fellowship.’ Rather, they have firm faith and believe, ‘His
satsang is firm, so there is no danger in reprimanding him.’

23

“The answer to the second question is: He may leave the person
he was previously staying with because he was unable to get along
with him, and subsequently go and stay with another person.
Despite this, though, he is unable to tolerate others speaking ill of the
person he originally stayed with. Thus, all of the sãdhus feel, ‘This
person is not ungrateful. He is a very good sãdhu because he has not
forgotten that he is indebted to the person from whom he has learnt
even a little.’ Realising this, all of the sãdhus like him. On the other
hand, if he leaves the person he was previously staying with to stay
with another person, and subsequently speaks ill of the person he
originally stayed with, all of the sãdhus feel, ‘This person is
ungrateful. In the future, if he does not get along with any of us, he
will surely speak ill of us too.’ As a result, no one likes him.”
The Vachanãmrut

159

24

Thereafter Daharãnand Swãmi asked, “God transcends Akshar;
He is beyond mind and speech; and He is imperceptible to all. Why,
then, can everyone see Him as manifest?”

25

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “God – who transcends Akshar, who is
beyond mind and speech, and who is imperceptible – Himself, out of
compassion, resolves, ‘May all the enlightened and unenlightened
people on Mrutyulok behold Me.’ Having resolved in this manner,
God – whose will always prevails – becomes perceivable to all people
on Mrutyulok out of compassion.”

26

Tyãgãnand Swãmi then asked, “How is God pleased?”

27

Shriji Mahãrãj answered, “A person who wants to please God
should not wish for bodily comforts. He should not even crave for the
darshan of God. In fact, to do exactly as God commands is the only
means to please God.”

28

Then Lakshmanãnand Swãmi asked, “With what understanding
is one able to feel the wonder of having attained the profound
association of God and His sãdhus? Also, how can one feel elated all
day and night?”

29

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “A devotee realises, ‘This God and these
sãdhus all reside in Vaikunth, Golok and Brahmapur. In fact, all of
those abodes are present wherever God and these sãdhus reside.
Therefore, I am extremely fortunate in that I am able to stay in the
presence of these sãdhus.’ If he understands this, then he will
experience awe all day and night and will sway in an ocean of bliss
throughout the day.”

30

Paramãtmãnand Swãmi then asked, “How can one acquire the
30 attributes of a sãdhu11 described in the 11th canto of the Shrimad
Bhãgwat?”

31

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “A person who regards the Sant who
possesses the 30 attributes as a guru and as a deity, and associates
with him by thought, word and deed acquires those 30 attributes. In
fact, all of the scriptures state, ‘When one serves the Sant, one
becomes like the Sant.’”

32

Thereafter Shãntãnand Swãmi asked, “There is one devotee who
constantly maintains his vrutti on the form of God. There is another
devotee who engages in worship and remembrance, and also listens to
and engages in discourses and devotional songs related to God.
Which devotee of God is the better of the two?”
The Vachanãmrut

160

33

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “He who experiences nirvikalp
samãdhi and is not conscious of his body is the better of the two, even
if he does not engage in discourses and devotional songs related to
God. However, there may be someone who is conscious of his body
and gets up from worship of his own accord to eat, drink and perform
all bodily activities, yet does not listen to or engage in the discourses
and devotional songs related to God. In comparison to him, a person
who listens to or engages in discourses and devotional songs is
better.”

34

Ãdhãrãnand Swãmi then asked, “How should we behave so that
God and His Sant become pleased?”

35

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “If we strictly adhere to the five religious
vows4 and do not allow any sort of lapse in their observance, God and
His Sant will be pleased. There is not even the slightest doubt about
this.”

36

Then Vedãntãnand Swãmi asked, “What can a person who has
previously behaved improperly do to please God and His Sant?”

37

Shriji Mahãrãj answered, “God and His Sant become displeased
upon seeing impure swabhãvs within a person. When we develop
enmity towards those swabhãvs, the Sant also realises this, because
whenever one bears animosity towards someone, the whole world
knows. Consequently, the Sant, who himself is also an enemy of
those swabhãvs, sides with us and bestows compassion upon us,
showing us the way to conquer those swabhãvs by whichever means
possible. Therefore, developing bitter hatred towards the particular
base swabhãv that has led to one’s disgrace, one should adopt means
that would totally uproot it. When we behave in this way, God and
His Sant shower total compassion upon us. Whenever God and His
disciples shower their compassion, one continues to experience
extreme bliss within one’s heart. Also, one’s capacity to walk on the
path of liberation increases, and the strength of one’s enemies – lust,
anger, avarice, etc. – decreases. Thus, God does help one who keeps
intense enmity towards that bitter enemy which causes distress
within one’s heart. That is why it is necessary to bear animosity for
one’s enemies of lust, anger, etc. It is thus very beneficial to develop
enmity towards one’s inner enemies.”

38

Thereafter Bhagwadãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, just as one
fears God when one is near Him, what understanding should one
have so that one fears God just as much when one is far from Him?”
The Vachanãmrut

161

39

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “Just as one maintains the respect of
God when He is near, the same respect remains when He is far if one
thoroughly understands the greatness of God. That greatness should
be understood as follows: ‘Purushottam Bhagwãn – who transcends
Akshar; by whose wish countless millions of brahmãnds are created;
who, by His powers, supports these brahmãnds; who is vyatirek, yet
is present within everything as anvay, and while being anvay, is also
vyatirek from everything; who dwells within each and every atom in
His antaryãmi form just as He is in His manifest form; without
whose wish not even a blade of grass is able to flutter; who is
responsible for creating, sustaining and destroying countless millions
of brahmãnds; who administers pain and pleasure to the beings
residing therein; and who is the sole doer of all that happens –
manifests on this earth for the liberation of the jivas. Yet, when that
very God mounts a horse, it appears that the horse is carrying Him;
though, in reality, it is God who is the upholder of the horse.
Furthermore, when God sits on the earth, it seems that the earth is
supporting God; yet, in reality, it is God who supports the entire
earth along with its mobile and immobile forms of life. Moreover, at
night, the light of the moon, an oil lamp or a torch allow one to have
the darshan of God; or during the day, the light of the sun allows one
to have the darshan of God. In reality, however, it is that God who
provides light to the sun, the moon, and the flames of fire. Such are
the magnificent powers of God. Despite this, though, God has become
like a human for the sake of the liberation of the jivas, and He is
giving darshan to me.’ If one understands the greatness of God in
this manner, then one can keep the same respect for God when one is
far from Him as when one is near Him.”

40

Bhagwadãnand Swãmi then asked another question, “Nothing
happens without God’s will; that is, everything that happens is all
the work of God alone. So when God or His devotees encounter
hardships, why then, does He not alleviate their distress? Why does
He merely wish to alleviate their distress?”

41

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “When God assumes a human form, it
is customary for Him to behave in absolutely the same manner as
humans do and not to reveal His transcendental powers. This is how
all of the actions and incidents of God are described in the scriptures.
Therefore, one may entertain doubts only when God exhibits new
actions. But as long as the actions of God are like those performed by
the previous avatãrs, no doubts should be entertained.”
The Vachanãmrut

162

42

Then Nirmalãnand Swãmi asked, “What understanding is
required to thoroughly realise the greatness of the Sant of God?”

43

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “When one contemplates upon the
greatness of Matsya, Kachchha, Varãh, Vãman, Parshurãm, Rãm,
Krishna and the countless avatãrs of God by thinking, ‘God has
liberated countless jivas through Rãm, Krishna, and other avatãrs. I
am extremely fortunate that I have attained the profound association
of the Sant of that very God’ – then one begins to thoroughly realise
the greatness of the Sant day by day.”

44

Thereafter Nãrãyanãnand Swãmi asked, “How is the jiva anvay
with the three bodies of sthul, sukshma and kãran; and how is it
vyatirek from them?”

45

Shriji Mahãrãj answered, “When the body encounters pleasure
and pain and the jiva assumes that pleasure and pain upon itself, the
jiva is anvay with the three bodies. When it believes itself to be
distinct from the pleasure and pain of the three bodies, then the jiva
is vyatirek from them.”

46

Shunyãtitãnand Swãmi then asked, “When a person practises
satsang initially, he has deep affection for the Sant and the
satsangis. But why does this affection later decline?”

47

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “Initially, he holds the Sant in very
high respect. Later, however, when he perceives a minor flaw in the
Sant, he regards it as a major flaw because of his own malicious
mind. As a result, his vicious nature flourishes, and his respect for
the Sant declines. Then, if he thoughtfully eradicates this vicious
nature, he becomes as pure as he was before. However, if he does not
do so, he ultimately falls from the Satsang fellowship.”

48

Thereafter Prasãdãnand Swãmi asked, “What is the cause of the
jiva’s liberation?”

49

Shriji Mahãrãj answered, “To do exactly as the Sant says
without harbouring any doubts is the only cause of the jiva’s
liberation.”

50

Then Trigunãtitãnand Swãmi asked, “What means should one
adopt when faced with adverse places, times, actions and company?”

51

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “The only way to overcome adverse
places, times, etc., is to escape from them by any means possible.”

The Vachanãmrut

163

52

Nãnã Nirvikãrãnand Swãmi then asked, “Despite having faith
in God, why are not one’s vicious desires eradicated?”

53

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “One’s vicious desires are not eradicated
because one has not fully realised the greatness of God.”

54

Then Motã Yogãnand Swãmi asked, “Despite having perfect
faith in God, why does a person still not develop affection for God and
discourses related to God?”

55

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “It is because he has not yet realised
the greatness of God as it is. If a person does thoroughly realise the
greatness of God, then he does not develop affection for anything
besides God, even if he tries. In addition, he develops unflinching
affection only for God, His Sant, and the discourses and devotional
songs related to God.”

56

Then Pratoshãnand Swãmi asked, “How can one’s bhakti
towards God remain unflinching?”

57

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “If a person thoroughly understands the
greatness of the manifest form of Shri Krishna Purushottam – who is
the cause of the four emanations9, i.e., Aniruddha, Pradyumna,
Sankarshan and Vãsudev; the cause of the 24 forms12, i.e., Keshav,
etc.; and the cause of Varãh and the other avatãrs – then he remains
unflinching in the nine types of bhakti towards God, i.e., listening to
talks of God, singing devotional songs, etc.”

58

After answering the questions of all of the munis in this way,
Shriji Mahãrãj asked them all, “Lust, anger and avarice – these
three are gateways to narak. All of you please reveal if you have
thoroughly conquered any of these.”

59

The munis then spoke regarding whatever each one had
resolved. Hearing this from the munis, Shriji Mahãrãj became
extremely pleased. After gladly imprinting His holy feet on the
chests of Ãtmãnand Swãmi, Yogãnand Swãmi, Bhagwadãnand
Swãmi
and
Shivãnand
Swãmi,
He
added,
“Just
as
Mahãnubhãvãnand Swãmi and the others are senior munis, these
four should also be considered senior along with them. Therefore, do
not allow anyone to insult them.”

60

aving appealed to Muktãnand Swãmi and other senior sãdhus in
this way, Shriji Mahãrãj bid ‘Jai Sachchidãnand’ to everyone and
returned to His residence for His meals.
The Vachanãmrut

164

|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I-78 || 78 ||

|| End of Gadhadã I Section ||

The Vachanãmrut

165

SÃRANGPUR SECTION
Sãrangpur-1
Conquering the Mind
1

On Shrãvan vadi 5, Samvat 1877 [28 August 1820], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on the veranda outside the northfacing rooms of Jivã Khãchar’s darbãr in Sãrangpur. He was
dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, an assembly of munis
as well as devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Muktãnand Swãmi asked a question: “The verse ‘Á¡Ã¢

¡ªÃ˜ ∑§Ÿ ◊ŸÙ Á„U ÿŸH’i explains that a person who has conquered his
mind can be said to have conquered the whole world. But how can
one know whether the mind has been conquered?”
3

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “When the indriyas withdraw from the
panchvishays, i.e., sights, sounds, smells, tastes and touch, and no
desire to indulge in those vishays remains, then all of the indriyas
are said to be conquered. Moreover, when the indriyas do not come
into contact with the vishays, the mind also does not come into
contact with the indriyas, and its vrutti remains within the heart.
In this way, one who has shunned the panchvishays with absolute
resolution should be known as having conquered one’s mind. But if
one does have some affection for the vishays, then even if one has
conquered one’s mind, it should not be known as having been
conquered.”

4

Again Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Is the means to defeat the
vishays vairãgya, or is it affection for God?”

5

Then Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “One way to defeat the vishays
is ãtmã-realisation, and the other is the realisation of God coupled
with the knowledge of His greatness. Specifically, ãtmã-realisation
should be of the following type: ‘I am chaitanya, while the body is jad;
i Jitam jagat kena mano hi yena||

Maniratnamãlã

The Vachanãmrut

166

I am pure, whereas the body is the embodiment of narak; I am
imperishable, while the body is perishable; I am the embodiment of
bliss, whereas the body is the embodiment of misery.’ In this
manner, when one realises the ãtmã to be totally distinct from the
body in every way, one will never consider oneself to be the body nor
will one harbour affection for vishays. This is how the vishays are
subdued through knowledge of the ãtmã.
6

“Also, one should think of the greatness of God in the following
way: ‘I am the ãtmã, while the manifest form of God whom I have
attained is Paramãtmã. I have attained Shri Purushottam Bhagwãn
in person, the very Purushottam Bhagwãn who is the lord of Golok,
Vaikunth, Shwetdwip and Brahmapur, as well as master of Brahmã
and the other deities, who themselves are the lords of countless
millions of brahmãnds. That Paramãtmã forever resides in my
ãtmã. I would discard all of the pleasures of the vishays of countless
millions of brahmãnds just for one second’s darshan of that God.
Moreover, if one were to gather together all of the pleasures of the
vishays of countless millions of brahmãnds, even then it would not
equal even one millionth of a fraction of the bliss which is present in
just one pore of God. In fact, in the Moksh-dharma, it is said that
the realms of the other deities are like narak compared to the
Akshardhãm of God. It is that very God whom I have attained in His
incarnated form. So how can I possibly discard Him and wish for the
pleasures of the vishays, which are like the pits of narak? In fact,
the pleasures of the vishays are nothing but the embodiment of
misery.’ So, the vishays can be subdued by realising God’s greatness
in this manner.

7

“The vairãgya generated by such knowledge of ãtmã and
Paramãtmã is such that it eradicates desires of the pleasures of all
vishays. A person who has shunned the pleasures of the vishays by
cultivating an understanding in this way never again develops
affection for the vishays. Only such a person’s mind can be said to be
conquered.

8

“Without such understanding, it may appear that a person has
much affection, but when he encounters an alluring vishay, he
abandons God and develops affection for that object. Or, if he
develops affection for his son, wife, etc., or he suffers on account of
some illness or the pleasures of the vishays disappear, then his
affection for God subsides, and he becomes disoriented. Just as a
The Vachanãmrut

167

dog’s puppy appears cute when it is young, the bhakti of such a
person initially appears to be good, but ultimately it does not remain
appealing.”
|| Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur-1 || 79 ||

Sãrangpur-2
Developing Affection for the Form of God
1

On Shrãvan vadi 6, Samvat 1877 [29 August 1820], Shriji
Mahãrãj was sitting facing north on a large, decorated cot which had
been placed on the veranda outside the north-facing rooms of Jivã
Khãchar’s darbãr in Sãrangpur. He was wearing a white khes and
had tied a white pãgh around His head. He had also covered Himself
with a white blanket. At that time, an assembly of munis as well as
devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Then, addressing the munis, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Please begin
a question and answer session amongst yourselves.”

3

Thereupon Swayamprakãshãnand Swãmi asked, “By what
means can a devotee of God develop intense affection for the form of
God?”

4

The munis then attempted to answer that question amongst
themselves but were unable to do so satisfactorily.

5

So Shriji Mahãrãj began to reply, “Affection can develop due to
beauty, due to lust, due to avarice, due to some selfish motives or due
to the other person’s virtues. Of these, affection which stems from
beauty lasts only until one sees the disfigurement caused by leprosy
in the other person’s body, or until the person develops leukoderma;
thereafter, the affection which once existed would dissolve. In the
same way, affection stemming from avarice, lust and selfishness also
ultimately dissolves. Affection developed due to the other person’s
virtues, however, ultimately survives.”

6

Then Somlã Khãchar asked Shriji Mahãrãj, “Which virtues are
these? External ones or internal ones?”

7

To this Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “How is it possible to develop
affection due to external virtues? Rather, it is affection stemming
from the virtues of the person’s speech, thoughts and deeds that does
not dissolve. Now, are you asking only about a devotee developing
The Vachanãmrut

168

affection for God? Or are you also asking about God developing
affection for the devotee?"
8

Swayamprakãshãnand Swãmi clarified, “We are asking about
both.”

9

Shriji Mahãrãj then began to elaborate by saying, “One should
not hurt any living being with one’s speech. Moreover, during a
question-answer session where principles are being debated with God
and a senior sãdhu, even then, those who are junior should yield to
those who are senior. Also, in an assembly, one should not ask
questions that may embarrass a sãdhu who is senior to one. Rather,
one should purposely accept defeat before God and a senior sãdhu.
Also, one should lovingly and immediately accept the command of
God and a senior sãdhu, regardless of whether it seems appropriate
or inappropriate. Of these, one would not doubt an appropriate
command. But even if it seems inappropriate and leads to doubts,
one should not refuse to abide by it, at least at that time. One should
certainly agree and say, ‘Mahãrãj! I will do just as You say.’ If that
command is such that one cannot accept it, and if it is the wish of
God and a senior sãdhu to hear one’s plea, then one should fold one’s
hands before them and say with bhakti, ‘Mahãrãj! The command
which You gave me is fine, but I have certain doubts about it.’ In
this manner, one should speak modestly. However, if it is not really
the wish of God to hear one’s plea, then one should tell a senior sãdhu
or devotee who is close to Him, ‘Although God has given such a
command, I simply cannot accept it.’ Thereafter, the senior sãdhu
would find a compromise and would also speak to God to help make a
compromise regarding that command. But regardless of whether the
command seems appropriate or inappropriate, one should not
immediately refuse to abide by it. Rather, one should use such
courtesy to delay the following of the command given by those who
are seniors; but when initially told, one should not immediately
refuse. This is how one should behave regarding the virtue of speech.
As a result, God and the senior sãdhu develop affection for that
devotee, and that devotee also develops strong affection towards God.

10

“Now, how should one behave physically? Well, if one’s body
seems to be hyperactive, one should weaken it by engaging in
worship or by observing the chãndrãyan vow. Then, on noticing this,
if God or a senior sãdhu takes care of one’s body, it is well and good,
but one should not knowingly take care of one’s own body. Also, one
The Vachanãmrut

169

should physically serve God and His devotees. When God or that
great sãdhu notice a person behaving in this manner physically, they
develop affection for him, and that devotee also develops affection for
God.
11

“Now I shall describe the manner in which a person should
behave regarding the virtues of the mind. When a devotee does
darshan of God, he should do so with an attentive mind and
concentrated vision. Instead, when a person distrubs, or a dog
disturbs, or some other animal or bird disturbs while he is doing
darshan of God, he breaks his vrutti from God’s darshan and begins
to glance to and fro, up and down, and also sees them
simultaneously. God and the senior sãdhu are not at all pleased
upon seeing a person with such wandering vision.

12

“So, when such a devotee does do darshan, how does he do it?
Well, he does it just as any ordinary person does. One who has such
a mundane vision should be known to be like a squirrel that squeaks
and raises its tail simultaneously – he does darshan of God and
notices other objects at the same time. When he begins to do
darshan in such a mundane manner, he does not remain as pious as
he previously was; in fact, he declines day by day. Therefore, while
doing darshan of God one should not look from side to side. The
novelty and divinity experienced in one’s heart at the time of the first
darshan of God should remain exactly the same. Moreover, one
should look at the form with a fixed gaze and then closing one’s eyes,
one should internalise that form exactly as it is in one’s heart. For
example, in Dharmapur, Kushalkuvarbãi did My darshan, and at
the same time, closed her eyes and internalised the form in her
heart. Similarly, one should do darshan while keeping an attentive
mind and a fixed gaze, but one should not do darshan as other
ordinary people do. If, along with the darshan of God, one also looks
at other people, cats, or dogs, then when one has a dream, one sees
not only God, but also those other objects. That is why one should do
darshan of God with a fixed gaze, not with a wandering gaze. One
who does darshan of God while keeping one’s sight under control will
feel that darshan to be continually novel. In addition, one would also
feel any commands that God may have given to be novel. On the
other hand, a person who does darshan superficially, with a
mundane vision, would feel God’s darshan and commands to be
commonplace. Although he may do darshan every day, for such a
person it is as if he has not done darshan at all. When such a person
The Vachanãmrut

170

engages in worship, his mind would not remain stable. Specifically,
when he attempts to concentrate on God while his thinking is
diffused, other objects he may have seen would spontaneously sprout
in his mind along with God. Therefore, one should do darshan only
of God. The mind of one who does darshan in such a manner
remains only on God during worship. His thinking does not become
diffused; instead, it becomes concentrated.
13

“Furthermore, I am able to discern when one is doing darshan
with wandering eyes. A great sãdhu whose own sight and mind are
kept under control also realises, ‘This person is doing darshan in a
superficial manner.’ One who does darshan in such a mundane
manner then begins to decline from this fellowship day by day.

14

“For example, a man who is overcome by lust, firmly and with a
focused mind, fixes his gaze on a beautiful woman. If at that time,
some animal or bird were to pass by or make a noise, he would not
notice it. In the same way, one should attach oneself to God with a
similarly focused gaze, but one should not do darshan in a mundane
manner.”

15

Then Nirvikãrãnand Swãmi raised a doubt, “Mahãrãj, we have
to travel and speak to people all over the country. As a result, our
mind does not remain concentrated.”

16

In reply, Shriji Mahãrãj questioned, “I have given a command
for you to speak to people, but when have I ever given a command for
you to disregard the darshan of this form and do darshan of other
things?”

17

Having said this, Mahãrãj continued, “The same divinity that
one feels when one has darshan of the form of God for the first time
can be retained if one keeps one’s mind and gaze fixed on God. So,
when one behaves in this manner, in accordance with the virtues of
the mind mentioned previously, then the affection that God has for
that devotee remains ever-fresh. Moreover, the affection which that
devotee has towards God also constantly remains ever-fresh.

18

“Moreover, both the eyes and ears should especially be kept
under control. This is because when worldly talks are prevalent
everywhere, and if one is attracted towards them through the vrutti
of the ears, and one listens to them, then all of those worldly words
would be recalled when one attempts to engage oneself in worship.
Furthermore, anything seen by one who has a wandering gaze is also
The Vachanãmrut

171

recalled during worship. That is why both of these indriyas should
be kept strictly under control. However, if, while doing darshan of
God’s form, the vrutti of one’s eyes and ears leaves the form aside and
is attracted towards other things, one should reprimand them,
saying, ‘O fools! What are you going to achieve by looking at forms
other than God and by listening to words other than the talks of God?
As of yet, you have not attained any yogic powers whereby you can
instantly receive whatever you wish. This is because you are still in
the process of enlightenment. So, you are not going to be able to
obtain those vishays that you desire; so why are you futilely grasping
for them and leaving God aside? Moreover, even if you were to attain
some insignificant vishay, then due to the sin incurred as a result,
there will be no end to the beatings you will receive in Yampuri.’ In
this manner, one should reprimand one’s eyes and ears.
19

“Furthermore, one should also tell them, ‘When you become
stabilised in the form of God, you will be enlightened in this very life.
As a result, you will be able to naturally hear any talk occurring in
any brahmãnd. If you desire to have a charming form like that of
Brahmã, Vishnu or Shiv, then you will be able to attain such a form.
Or, if you wish to become a devotee like Lakshmi or Rãdhikã, then
you will become so. Moreover, if, while worshipping God, you do not
attain enlightenment in this very life, you will attain enlightenment
after death, when you become a mukta. But without becoming
enlightened, even if you constantly look at some charming object
until you die, you will still not be able to attain that charm.
Furthermore, even if you listen to worldly talks until you die, you
will still not attain anything; rather, your mind will become
extremely polluted by it.’ One should advise one’s eyes and ears in
this manner and keep them fixed only on the form of God. A person
who behaves in such a manner increasingly develops affection for the
form of God day by day. As a result, God’s and the great sãdhu’s
affection for that devotee also increases day by day.”
|| Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur-2 || 80 ||

Sãrangpur-3
‘Shravan’, ‘Manan’, ‘Nididhyãs’ and ‘Sãkshãtkãr’
1

In the evening of Shrãvan vadi 7, Samvat 1877 [30 August
1820], Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot on the
The Vachanãmrut

172

veranda outside the rooms of Jivã Khãchar’s darbãr in Sãrangpur.
He was wearing a white khes and had tied a white pãgh around His
head. He had also covered Himself with a black-bordered khes. At
that time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees from various
places had gathered before Him.
2

Thereupon Swayamprakãshãnand Swãmi asked Shriji Mahãrãj
a question: “Mahãrãj, suppose there is a devotee who physically
performs puja of the manifest form of God with various types of puja
implements. Also suppose there is another devotee who performs
mãnsi pujã of God using various imaginary implements. Who is the
better of the two devotees?”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “If a person lovingly performs puja of
God, with hair-raising sentiments and an emotion-filled voice, then
regardless of whether he performs puja physically or performs mãnsi
pujã, both are superior.
Conversely, if he performs puja
mechanically – without feeling love or excitement, and without
showing emotion in his voice – then regardless of whether he
performs puja of God physically or performs mãnsi pujã of God, both
are inferior.”

4

Then Somlã Khãchar asked, “By what characteristics can one
recognise a devotee who, in the above manner, becomes overwhelmed
with love while performing physical puja or mãnsi pujã of God?”

5

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “Such a person has intense shraddhã in
performing the puja of God and serving Him, in listening to
discourses and talks related to God, and in singing devotional songs.
He also understands the profound greatness of God. With each
passing day, both of these two aspects remain ever fresh, but never
diminish.
For example, Muktãnand Swãmi’s shraddhã and
understanding of God’s greatness are exactly the same today and just
as fresh as they were when I first saw him in Lojpur; they have not
diminished in any way whatsoever. In the same manner, such a
devotee should be recognised by these two characteristics.

6

“All of the Yãdavs who stayed with Shri Krishna Bhagwãn did
not have such shraddhã or understanding of God’s greatness; they
served him just like they would serve other kings. Therefore, they
did not achieve fame and are not even regarded as devotees. On the
other hand, Uddhavji served Shri Krishna Bhagwãn with shraddhã
and an understanding of his greatness, and therefore he has been
The Vachanãmrut

173

described as an eminent devotee of God and has been extremely
renowned in the scriptures and in the world.”
7

Thereafter Nirvikãrãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, what is
‘shravan’, ‘manan’, ‘nididhyãs’ and ‘sãkshãtkãr’?”

8

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “To listen to a talk through one’s ears
is known as ‘shravan’. Then, having heard the talk, to mentally
ponder over the talk, and to discard that part of the talk which is fit
to be discarded and to retain that part of the talk which is fit to be
retained is known as ‘manan’. Then, having mentally retained the
talk with conviction, the practice of continuously recalling the talk
day and night is known as ‘nididhyãs’. Finally, when one can recall
that talk exactly as it was – as if it were manifest before one – with
absolute clarity and spontaneity, that is known as ‘sãkshãtkãr’.

9

“If one engages in ‘shravan’, ‘manan’ and ‘nididhyãs’ of the
nature of the ãtmã in this manner, then one will attain ‘sãkshãtkãr’
of the ãtmã. Furthermore, if one engages in ‘shravan’, ‘manan’ and
‘nididhyãs’ of God in this manner, then one will attain ‘sãkshãtkãr’ of
God. ‘Sãkshãtkãr’ cannot be attained by doing ‘shravan’ alone,
without practising both ‘manan’ and ‘nididhyãs’.

10

“If a person does not practise ‘manan’ and ‘nididhyãs’ following
the darshan of God’s form, then even if he does darshan for
thousands of years, he will not attain ‘sãkshãtkãr’ of that form.
Why? Because such darshan is like having done only ‘shravan’. On
the other hand, if one had done darshan of God’s entire body, and had
subsequently done ‘manan’ and ‘nididhyãs’ of all of the parts of His
body, then one would be able to easily recall those parts even today.
Conversely, one who had done only darshan of God’s body would be
unable to recall it, even if one attempted to recall it.

11

“Also, there are some devotees who say, ‘We sit in meditation
and try very hard to recall Mahãrãj’s form, yet we cannot visualise
even a single part. How, then, can we possibly envision the whole
form?’ The reason for this is the same as above – they merely do
darshan of the form, without doing ‘manan’ and ‘nididhyãs’. How
then can it be visualised? After all, if one has merely seen even a
worldly object with one’s eyes, or merely listened to it with one’s ears,
and it is not subsequently mentally recalled, it will be forgotten.
How then can one expect to remember the form of God – which is
divine and not worldly – without doing ‘manan’ and ‘nididhyãs’?
The Vachanãmrut

174

12

“Therefore, if one continuously engages in ‘manan’ and
‘nididhyãs’ after doing darshan of God and listening to His talks,
then one will attain ‘sãkshãtkãr’ of them. Otherwise, even if one
does darshan and ‘shravan’ for the rest of one’s life, one will still not
attain ‘sãkshãtkãr’.”
|| Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur-3 || 81 ||

Sãrangpur-4
Wisdom in Discerning between Ãtmã and Non-Ãtmã
1

On Shrãvan vadi 8, Samvat 1877 [31 August 1820], Shriji
Mahãrãj was sitting facing north on a large, decorated cot on the
veranda outside the rooms of Jivã Khãchar’s darbãr in Sãrangpur.
He was wearing a white khes and had tied a white pãgh around His
head. Also, He had covered Himself with a white blanket. At that
time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees from various places
had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Swayamprakãshãnand Swãmi asked a question:
“Mahãrãj, how should one clearly understand the distinction between
the ãtmã and non-ãtmã, which, once understood, will never cause one
to mistake ãtmã and non-ãtmã to be one?”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “That which is understood clearly is
beneficial – whether it is understood by one verse, or by two verses,
or by five verses, or by a hundred verses, or even by a thousand
verses. So, once one has cultivated such an understanding clearly,
no misconception remains about the ãtmã and non-ãtmã being one.
Furthermore, only such clear understanding leads to happiness,
whereas a foolish understanding does not lead to happiness.
Therefore, one should clearly understand, ‘I am the ãtmã, and not a
single one of my characteristics can be found in the body. Moreover,
not one of the characteristics of the body – which is jad, full of misery
and perishable – can be found in me since I am chaitanya.’ After
making such a distinction and becoming totally free of worldly
desires, one should believe oneself to be chaitanya and contemplate
upon Purushottam Bhagwãn. Discerning between that which is jad
and that which is chaitanya in this manner should be known as true
wisdom.

The Vachanãmrut

175

4

“However, a person who believes himself to be the ãtmã for a
while but then, believing himself to be the body for a while, fantasises
about women, should be known as a fool. He will not experience
happiness in his heart. For example, there may be some delicious
food which is comparable to amrut, but if just a small amount of
poison were to be mixed with it, then that food would never give one
pleasure; on the contrary, it would lead to misery. In the same way,
a person may think of the ãtmã all day, but if he believes himself to
be the body and fantasises about women, even for just a moment,
then all of his thoughts are futile. Therefore, one should engage in
contemplation purely of the ãtmã so as to become totally free of
worldly desires.

5

“Now, someone may doubt: ‘What will become of me if I do not
become totally free of worldly desires and happen to die in that
imperfect state?’ Well, a devotee of God should never think like that.
Instead, he should realise, ‘If anything dies, it is this body. But as I
am the ãtmã, which does not age and is immortal; I will never die.’
Having cultivated such an understanding, he should maintain
courage, keep a resolute mind, and discard all desires other than
those for God.

6

“Then, in the process of eradicating worldly desires in this
manner, if a few desires do linger, he will attain the naraks described
in the Moksh-dharma. Specifically, if a devotee of God retains any
desires for the world, then he attains the realms of Indra and other
deities. After transmigrating to those realms, he experiences the
pleasures of celestial maidens, celestial vehicles, palaces decorated
with jewels, and other luxuries – which are nonetheless comparable
to narak before the abode of God. However, a devotee of God does not
go to Yampuri in the manner of a non-believer, nor does he re-enter
the cycle of births and deaths.

7

“Thus, even if a devotee of God harbours worldly desires, if
nothing else, he will become a deity. Then, having become a deity, he
will become a human again. As a human, after offering bhakti to
God and becoming free of worldly desires, he will ultimately attain
the abode of God. But he will not have to suffer from the miseries of
narak or the cycle of births and deaths in the manner of nonbelievers. Bearing this in mind, a devotee of God should not become
discouraged on seeing the force of worldly desires. Rather, he should
joyfully continue to worship God, persevere in his attempts to
The Vachanãmrut

176

eradicate his desires, and maintain absolute faith in the words of God
and the Sant of God.”
|| Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur-4 || 82 ||

Sãrangpur-5
Anvay-Vyatirek
1

On Shrãvan vadi 9, Samvat 1877 [1 September 1820], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot on
the veranda outside the north-facing rooms of Jivã Khãchar’s darbãr
in Sãrangpur. He was dressed entirely in white clothes. At that
time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees from various places
had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Muktãnand Swãmi asked a question: “Which method
of eradicating worldly desires is so powerful that that method alone
incorporates all other means?”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “The worldly desires of a person who has
the following four attributes in his heart will be eradicated:
Shraddhã, faith in the words of God and His devotees, affection for
God and the knowledge of God’s greatness. Of these, if only the
knowledge of God’s greatness is extremely powerful and the other
three – shraddhã, faith and affection – are weak, then they will also
become extremely powerful. On the other hand, although one may
appear to have intense bhakti, if it is not coupled with the knowledge
of God’s greatness, it will ultimately be destroyed. For example, a
ten- or twelve-year-old girl who has contracted tuberculosis will
certainly die before she matures into a young woman. Similarly, one
whose bhakti lacks the knowledge of God’s greatness will find that
his bhakti will be destroyed before it matures.

4

“Furthermore, if a person has bhakti for God in his heart
coupled with the knowledge of God’s greatness, then even though he
does not possess any other redemptive virtues, they will still develop
in his heart. Conversely, if a person does not have bhakti in his
heart coupled with the knowledge of God’s greatness, then even
though he possesses redemptive virtues such as tranquillity, selfrestraint, etc., they are as good as being absent because they will
ultimately be destroyed.

The Vachanãmrut

177

5

“Therefore, even if one possesses only bhakti coupled with the
knowledge of God’s greatness, the worldly desires which one harbours
will still be eradicated, and all of the redemptive virtues will develop
and reside within one’s heart. Therefore, bhakti of God coupled with
the knowledge of His greatness is the greatest and most steadfast
means to eradicate one’s worldly desires.”

6

Then Swayamprakãshãnand Swãmi asked, “What is the anvay
nature of the jiva, and what is its vyatirek nature? What is the
anvay nature of ishwar, and what is its vyatirek nature? What is
the anvay nature of Akshar, and what is its vyatirek nature? How
should Purushottam Bhagwãn be known in His anvay form, and how
should He be known in His vyatirek form?”

7

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “When the jiva is said to be the
experiencer of births and deaths, that should be known as the jiva’s
anvay form. When the jiva is said to be uncuttable, unpierceable and
eternal, that should be known as the jiva’s vyatirek form.

8

“When ishwar behaves as one with its three bodies of virãt,
sutrãtmã and avyãkrut, that should be known as the anvay form of
ishwar. When ishwar is described as being characterised by eternal
existence, consciousness and bliss, and as transcending its body in
the form of the brahmãnd, that should be known as the vyatirek
form of ishwar.

9

“That which is the inspirer of Prakruti-Purush and all of the
deities such as Surya, Chandra, etc., should be known as the anvay
form of Akshar. The form in which there is not even a trace of the
influence of Prakruti-Purush, etc., and in which only Purushottam
Bhagwãn resides – that should be known as the vyatirek form of
Akshar.

10

“The anvay form of Purushottam is that which resides in the
hearts of both bound jivas and released jivas as their witness; yet, He
remains untouched by such states of bondage and release. In the
same way, He also resides in the hearts of ishwars and Akshar as
their witness; yet, He remains devoid of their influence. The form
that transcends jiva, ishwar and Akshar should be known as the
vyatirek form of Purushottam. These are the anvay-vyatirek natures
of the various entities.”

11

Again, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Does the importance of God’s
darshan, the importance of chanting His holy name, and the
The Vachanãmrut

178

importance of the touch of God apply only to the devotees of God, or
does it also apply to all beings?”
12

Shriji Mahãrãj answered, “The modes of darshan, chanting, etc.,
are certainly different, so please listen as I explain them to you.
When a person does darshan of God with his eyes coupled with his
mind, then that darshan would be such that it could not be forgotten,
even if he tried to forget it. In the same manner, if the skin is
coupled with one’s mind when one touches God, then that touch will
also not be forgotten. For example, the Shrimad Bhãgwat narrates
the words spoken by the gopis to God: ‘O God! Since the day we
touched your feet, all of the pleasures of the world, besides you, have
seemed like poison to us.’ Likewise, when all of the respective gnãnindriyas are coupled with the mind and are then engaged in darshan,
listening, touching, etc., the experiences are never forgotten.

13

“To give another example, an ignorant person who indulges in
the vishays when the five gnãn-indriyas are coupled with his mind
can never forget them, even if he wants to forget them. Similarly,
only that darshan of God, listening to the talks of God, etc., which
have been done with the mind engaged should be known as darshan,
listening, etc. On the other hand, a person may do darshan, but it is
as good as not having done darshan at all. Why? Because at the
time he was doing darshan, his mind was wandering elsewhere.
Consequently, he will certainly forget that darshan within a day, or
maybe within five days, or maybe within 50 days, or maybe within
six months, or maybe after one year, or after five years. Ultimately,
it will not remain.

14

“Therefore, only one who engages the five gnãn-indriyas – the
eyes, ears, etc. – coupled with the mind, in the darshan, touch, etc.,
of God with intense love and the understanding of His greatness
attains the fruits of that darshan, touch, etc. Others who have the
darshan, touch, etc., of God attain only the seeds. But the real
importance applies only to those who engage in the darshan, touch,
etc., together with the mind.”
|| Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur-5 || 83 ||

The Vachanãmrut

179

Sãrangpur-6
Two States within Each State;
The Four Types of Speech
1

On Shrãvan vadi 10, Samvat 1877 [2 September 1820], Shriji
Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot on the veranda outside
the north-facing rooms of Jivã Khãchar’s darbãr in Sãrangpur. He
was dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, an assembly of
munis as well as devotees from various places had gathered before
Him.

2

Thereupon Nityãnand Swãmi asked a question: “How do the two
other states stay within each of the three states7?”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “That in which the jivãtmã dwells when
it indulges in the vishays is known as a ‘state’. There are three types
of states: waking, dream and deep sleep.

4

“Of these, the waking state is the result of the sustenance state
of Virãt-Purush. It is full of sattvagun and is located in the region of
the eyes.
In that waking state, the jivãtmã is known as
‘vishwãbhimãni’. Moreover, with the consciousness of its sthul body,
via the ten indriyas and the four antahkarans, the jivãtmã
appropriately and with discretion indulges in the pleasures of the
external vishays according to its past karmas. This is known as the
waking state, wherein sattvagun is predominant.

5

“Now, if within that waking state the jivãtmã indulges in the
pleasures of the external vishays inappropriately due to some
misconception, then that is known as the dream state within the
waking state. If in that waking state, the jivãtmã indulges in the
pleasures of the external vishays without discretion due to sorrow,
fatigue, etc., then that is known as deep sleep within the waking
state.

6

“The dream state is the result of the creation state of
Hiranyagarbh. It is full of rajogun and is located in the region of the
throat.
In that dream state, the jivãtmã is known as
‘taijasãbhimãni’. With the consciousness of its sukshma body, via
the indriyas and antahkaran, the jivãtmã indulges in pleasurable
and miserable vishays – which are transient – according to its past
karmas. This is known as the dream state, wherein rajogun is
predominant.
The Vachanãmrut

180

7

“If within that dream state the jivãtmã knowingly indulges in
the pleasures of the transient vishays with discretion and awareness,
exactly as it does during wakefulness, then that is known as the
waking state within the dream state. However, if in that dream
state the jivãtmã, due to sluggishness, does not recognise those
transient vishays which it experiences, then that is known as the
state of deep sleep within the dream state.

8

“The state of deep sleep is the result of the dissolution state of
ishwar. It is full of tamogun and is located in the region of the heart.
When the jiva is in that state of deep sleep, the vruttis of the indriyas
and the antahkaran, the desires for the pleasures of the vishays, as
well as its sense of knowership and doership all become merged in the
kãran body. When the jivãtmã, which has the consciousness of its
kãran body – known as ‘prãgna’ – remains fully absorbed in the bliss
of sagun Brahma in the form of Pradhãn-Purush, then that is known
as the deep sleep state – wherein tamogun is predominant.

9

“If within that deep sleep state a sense of doership develops due
to the impressions of one’s karmas, then that is known as the dream
state within the state of deep sleep. The opposing realisation of that
sense of doership – which disrupts the bliss of deep sleep on account
of the agony of the pain experienced during wakefulness and
dreams – is known as the waking state within the state of deep sleep.

10

“In this manner, the other two states reside within each
individual state. Moreover, that from whom the jivãtmã obtains
knowledge of these distinctions between the states, and who gives the
jiva the fruits of its karmas accordingly within those states, is known
as turyapad, as the antaryãmi, as the drashtã, as Brahmai , and also
as Parabrahma.”

11

Again, Nityãnand Swãmi asked, “How should one understand
the four types of speech – ‘parã’, ‘pashyanti’, ’madhyamã’ and
‘vaikhari’?”

12

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “That is a vast, as well as an extremely
subtle subject, but in the 11th canto of the Shrimad Bhãgwat, Shri
Krishna Bhagwãn explains it to Uddhavji. Please listen as I explain
it in brief.

i The term ‘Brahma’ is also used in scriptures to mean God.

The Vachanãmrut

181

13

“At the time of the first creation, after entering the thousandpetalled lotus which lies on the head of Virãt-Purush, Purushottam
Bhagwãn produced the primordial divine sound – which resembled
the form of Aksharbrahma. Then, via the sushumnã path, that
divine sound pervaded the navel of Virãt-Purush. Then, along with
mahãprãn, it rose upwards, and thus caused Virãt-Purush’s lotusnavel – which was previously facing downwards – to face upwards.
In this way, the divine sound produced in the navel of Virãt-Purush
is known as the ‘parã’ speech. For the purpose of creating the Vedas,
God Himself has inspired that ‘parã’ speech – thus it is like a seed.
That ‘parã’ speech is like a stream of light, and is the cause of the
‘ardhamãtrã.’i

14

“From there, that speech known as ‘parã’ reached the
hrudayãkãsh of Virãt, where it was known by the name of
‘pashyanti’. From there, it reached the region of the throat and
became known by the name of ‘madhyamã’. From there, it reached
the mouth of Virãt and received the name of ‘vaikhari’. It then
became the form of pranav by becoming the three sounds of ‘A’, ‘U’
and ‘M’. It then became the 52 syllables and took the form of the four
Vedas. In this way, one should understand the four types of speech –
‘parã’, ‘pashyanti’, ‘madhyamã’ and ‘vaikhari’ – in Virãt-Purush.

15

“Now I shall describe these four types of speech which also dwell
within the body of the jiva, so please listen. That same Purushottam
Bhagwãn resides in the jiva as antaryãmi. He is independent, yet
interwoven with the three states of the jiva. That same God assumes
an avatãr on this earth to liberate the jivas. At that time, those jivas
describe the form of that God as well as His abodes, virtues and
divine powers. They describe His divine actions and incidents, make
a distinction between ãtmã and non-ãtmã, and also individually
explain the differences between jiva, ishwar, mãyã, Brahma and
Parabrahma. Such speech is known as ‘parã’. Speech that gives a
complete explanation of worldly entities and vishays with discretion
is known as ‘vaikhari’. Speech that gives an incomplete explanation,
thus creating confusion, of entities and vishays is known as
‘madhyamã’. Finally, speech which blindly describes those entities

i One of the six syllables in the root sound ‘AUM’.

The Vachanãmrut

182

and vishays as being the same, and which cannot be understood, is
known as ‘pashyanti’.
16

“In this manner, the details of those four types of speech can be
known in the waking state of the jiva.
The details of
those four types of speech in the dream and deep sleep states can only
be known by one who has mastered samãdhi; it cannot be known by
others.”
|| Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur-6 || 84 ||

Sãrangpur-7
Naimishãranya Kshetra
1

On the night of Shrãvan vadi 11, Samvat 1877 [3 September
1820], Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot on the
veranda outside the north-facing rooms of Jivã Khãchar’s darbãr in
Sãrangpur. He was dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time,
an assembly of munis as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him.

2

In the assembly, Shriji Mahãrãj had requested the first canto of
the Shrimad Bhãgwat Purãn to be read. During the reading, the
following statement was encountered: ‘Wherever the jagged edges of
the manomay chakra are worn away, that place should be known as
Naimishãranya Kshetra.’
Hearing this, Muktãnand Swãmi
inquired, “Mahãrãj, what exactly is the manomay chakra, and what
should one understand its jagged edges to be?”

3

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “One should understand
the mind to be the manomay chakra, and the ten indriyas to be its
jagged edges. Wherever those jagged edges of the mind, in the form
of the indriyas, wear away and become blunt, that place should be
known as Naimishãranya Kshetra. Pious deeds such as chanting
the name of God, austerities, observances, meditation, puja, etc.,
commenced there flourish rapidly, day by day. Furthermore, that
Naimishãranya Kshetra should be known to be wherever God’s
Ekãntik Sant resides.

4

“When the jagged edges of the manomay chakra are worn away,
no affection remains towards any of the panchvishays, i.e., sights,
sounds, smells, tastes and touch. Then, even if one sees a beautiful
woman or extremely enticing clothes, ornaments and other objects, a
The Vachanãmrut

183

strong aversion develops towards them deep within one’s mind. But
never would the indriyas’ vruttis cling to them.
5

“For example, an extremely sharp arrow pierces and lodges into
its target; then it cannot be removed. However, if that same arrow,
with its tip removed so that only its shaft remains, were to be shot at
a mud wall, it would rebound and fall to the ground; it would not
penetrate the wall like the sharp-tipped arrow. Similarly, when the
jagged edges of the manomay chakra; i.e., the indriyas, are worn
away, then no matter how alluring the vishays may be, the indriyas’
vruttis would not be drawn towards them. Instead, they would
rebound like the blunt arrow-shaft. When one is able to behave in
this manner, the jagged edges of the manomay chakra can be said to
have been worn away.

6

“So, one should seek liberation wherever one sees such a
Naimishãranya Kshetra in the form of the association of the Sant,
and one should remain there with an absolutely resolute mind.”
|| Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur-7 || 85 ||

Sãrangpur-8
The Characteristics of Jealousy
1

On Shrãvan vadi 12, Samvat 1877 [4 September 1820], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot on
the veranda outside the north-facing rooms of Jivã Khãchar’s darbãr
in Sãrangpur. He was dressed entirely in white clothes. At that
time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees from various places
had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Chaitanyãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, what are
the characteristics of jealousy?”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “Jealousy develops from the egotism that
a person harbours within his heart. In fact, anger, matsar and
asuyã also arise out of egotism. But the characteristic of jealousy is
that one cannot bear to see even someone greater than oneself being
honoured. A person who has such a nature should be known to have
jealousy within his heart. Moreover, one who has extreme jealousy
cannot bear anyone’s greatness.”
|| Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur-8 || 86 ||
The Vachanãmrut

184

Sãrangpur-9
The Prevalence of the Dharma of the Yugs; ‘Sthãn’
1

On Shrãvan vadi 13, Samvat 1877 [5 September 1820], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj walked from Sãrangpur and arrived at
Kundal to please His devotees. There, He was sitting facing north on
a large, decorated cot on the veranda outside the west-facing rooms of
Amrã Patgar’s home. He had tied a white pãgh around His head.
Also, He had covered Himself with a white blanket and was wearing
a white survãl and a white angarkhu. At that time, an assembly of
munis as well as devotees from various places had gathered before
Him.

2

Thereupon Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, why do the
dharma of the yugs prevail in a person’s heart?”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “The dharma of the yugs prevail because
of the three gunas. When pure sattvagun is prevalent, Satya-yug
prevails in the heart. When sattvagun and rajogun are prevalent
together, Tretã-yug prevails in the heart. When rajogun and
tamogun are prevalent together, Dwãpar-yug prevails in the heart.
Finally, when tamogun alone is prevalent, Kali-yug prevails in the
heart. In this way, the prevalence of the yugs is due to the gunas.”

4

Muktãnand Swãmi asked further, “What causes the activities of
the gunas?”

5

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “The cause of the activities of the gunas
are karmas. Specifically, the type of karmas one has performed
previously determines the guna that will prevail. Hence, if a person
in whom rajogun and tamogun are prevalent attempts to concentrate
and meditate on God, he will not be able to do so. In such situations,
he should utilise the strength of ãtmã-realisation and God’s
greatness. He should realise, ‘I am the ãtmã. Since I am gunãtit,
there can be no mãyik influence within me.’ Furthermore, he should
realise God’s greatness in the following way: ‘Ajãmel was a terrible
sinner and yet, because of his son, he uttered the name of Nãrãyan.
As a result, he was freed from all his sins and attained the highest
state of enlightenment. I have attained that God in His manifest
form, and I chant His holy name day and night. Therefore, I am
fulfilled.’ Thinking in such a manner, one should always remain
joyful.
The Vachanãmrut

185

6

“However, a person in whom rajogun and tamogun are
prevalent should not insist on meditating or concentrating; instead,
he should engage in physical worship as much as possible. Moreover,
he should physically serve God and the Sant with shraddhã. At the
same time, he should abide by his dharma and believe himself to be
fulfilled.”

7

Again Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Kali-yug prevails in the heart
of a person who has accumulated many tãmasik karmas. Is there
any method to eradicate those karmas, or not?”

8

Shriji Mahãrãj answered, “If he has intense shraddhã and
extremely firm faith in the words of God and the Sant, then whatever
type of tãmasik karmas he may have performed, they will be
destroyed; the dharma of Kali-yug will also vanish, and the dharma
of Satya-yug will prevail. Therefore, if one practises satsang with
absolute sincerity, then no fault will remain in one’s heart, and one
will become brahmarup in this very lifetime.”

9

Thereafter Swayamprakãshãnand Swãmi asked, “What can be
called ‘sthãn’?”

10

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “An individual’s dharma according to the
four castes and the four ãshrams should be known as ‘sthãn’. You
are all renunciants; but if you were to leave this fold and tread the
path of householders, then you would be known to have diverted from
your ‘sthãn’. So, even in the most difficult circumstances, or even if I
were to issue a command, you should not deviate from your dharma.
Moreover, while householders wish to perform My puja by offering
clothes and ornaments, you should not wish to do so. Rather, you
should offer puja by using leaves, flowers, fruits and water, and you
should experience joy by performing such puja. It would not be
appropriate for you to deviate from your dharma to perform puja of
God. Thus, all of you should remain within your own dharma and
offer puja within your capacity. This is My command, so resolve to
abide by it firmly.”
|| Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur-9 || 87 ||

The Vachanãmrut

186

Sãrangpur-10
A Physical Perspective versus the Ãtmã’s
Perspective; Being Beaten by Shoes
1

On Shrãvan vadi 14, Samvat 1877 [6 September 1820], Shriji
Mahãrãj walked with all of the sãdhus from Kundal and, along the
way, arrived at Khãmbhdã. There, they settled themselves under a
pipal tree. The people of the village then brought a decorated cot and
had Shriji Mahãrãj sit upon it. He was dressed entirely in white
clothes. At that time, sãdhus as well as devotees from various places
gathered around Him in an assembly while other sãdhus were
singing devotional songs.

2

Shriji Mahãrãj then asked the sãdhus to stop singing and
addressed the village folk, “In this world there are two types of people:
those who follow the path of righteousness and those who follow the
path of unrighteousness. Of these, one who follows the path of
righteousness forsakes stealing, adultery, slander and all other forms
of sin. Fearing God, such a person remains within the disciplines of
dharma. As a result, everyone in the world trusts him, be it a
member of his family or anyone else, and whatever he says is
accepted by all as the truth. Only such a person who observes
dharma likes the company of a true sãdhu.

3

“On the other hand, a person who follows the path of
unrighteousness is engrossed in evil deeds such as stealing, adultery,
eating meat, drinking alcohol, changing someone’s caste by force and
having one’s own caste changed by force. As a result, no one in the
world ever trusts him. In fact, even his own relatives do not trust
him. Such an unrighteous person never likes the company of a true
sãdhu. In fact, if someone else were to keep the company of such a
sãdhu, the unrighteous person would spite him too.

4

“Therefore, one who aspires to attain liberation should not follow
the path of unrighteousness; instead, one should follow the path of
righteousness and keep the company of a true sãdhu. As a result,
one would certainly, without a doubt, attain liberation.”

5

Hearing this discourse, many people of the village accepted the
refuge of Shriji Mahãrãj.

6

Thereafter, Shriji Mahãrãj returned to Sãrangpur and sat on a
decorated cot on the veranda outside the north-facing rooms of Jivã
The Vachanãmrut

187

Khãchar’s darbãr. He was dressed entirely in white clothes. At that
time, munis as well as devotees from various places had gathered
before Him.
7

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “If one looks at the abodes of
God – Golok, Vaikunth, Shwetdwip, Brahmapur – from a physical
perspective, they appear to be very far away. However, if one looks at
them from the ãtmã’s perspective, they are not even an atom’s
distance away. Therefore, the understanding of one who views from
a physical perspective is false, and the understanding of one who
views from the perspective of the ãtmã is true. Indeed, God and the
abode of God are not even an atom’s distance away from a sãdhu who
believes, ‘God is forever present in my chaitanya,’ and ‘Just like the
jiva resides in the body, God resides within my jiva. My jiva is the
sharir, and God is the shariri of my jiva.’ Such a sãdhu also believes
that his jivãtmã is distinct from the three bodies – sthul, sukshma
and kãran – and that that God forever resides within his ãtmã. Such
a Sant is like a mukta of Shwetdwip. When one has the darshan of
such a Sant, one should realise, ‘I have had the darshan of God
Himself.’ A Sant who has such an understanding has nothing more
to attain.

8

“If a person is unable to attain such an understanding, then he
should maintain profound association with such a Sant. If that Sant
were to daily beat him five times with a pair of shoes, he should still
tolerate such insults, but just as an opium addict cannot abandon his
addiction, in no way should he abandon his association with the
Sant. Such a person should be known to be equal to the Sant
mentioned earlier. Moreover, whatever that Sant attains, one who
continues to profoundly associate with such a Sant also attains.”
|| Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur-10 || 88 ||

Sãrangpur-11
Personal Endeavour
1

On Shrãvan vadi Amãs, Samvat 1877 [7 September 1820],
Swãmi Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated
cot on the veranda outside the north-facing rooms of Jivã Khãchar’s
darbãr in Sãrangpur. He was dressed entirely in white clothes. At
that time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees from various
places had gathered before Him.
The Vachanãmrut

188

2

Thereupon Muktãnand Swãmi asked a question: “Personal
endeavour is mentioned in the scriptures, but how much is actually
achieved by personal endeavour, and how much is achieved by God’s
grace?”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “One who, by the words of the
Sadguru and the scriptures, has attained firm vairãgya, has firm
shraddhã, strictly observes the eight aspects of brahmacharya, has
affinity towards non-violence and absolutely firmly realises oneself to
be the ãtmã is relieved of the burden of births and deaths which
hangs over one’s head. Then, just like a grain of rice that has had its
outer chaff removed does not grow, a mukta who has the virtues just
mentioned is freed from eternal ignorance in the form of mãyã. He is
thereby freed from the cycle of births and deaths and attains the
state of ãtmã-realisation. This much can be achieved by personal
endeavour.

4

“In fact, God’s grace is only bestowed upon one who has such
characteristics. When one attains the grace of God, one becomes an
ekãntik bhakta. Even the Shrutis proclaim: ‘ÁŸ⁄Ü¡Ÿ— ¬⁄◊¢ ‚Êêÿ◊È¬ÒÁÃ

H’i. The meaning of this Vedic verse is that a person who is free from

the blemishes of mãyã attains qualities similar to those of God. That
is, just as God is never bound by any pure or impure karmas that He
may perform, the mukta is also never bound by pure or impure
karmas.
5

“Because of her affection, Lakshmiji sometimes becomes
absorbed in God’s form, whereas on other occasions, while remaining
separate from God, she remains in God’s service. In the same
manner, out of intense love, the devotee also sometimes becomes
absorbed in God, and at other times he remains separate and serves
God. Moreover, just as God is independent, that devotee also becomes
independent. Such powers can be attained only by the grace of God.”

6

Thereafter Nityãnand Swãmi asked, “God’s grace is bestowed
upon one who has imbibed all of these characteristics perfectly. But
what becomes of one who has some deficiency in cultivating these
characteristics?”

i Niranjanaha paramam sãmyam-upaiti|

Mundaka Upanishad: III-3.1

The Vachanãmrut

189

7

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “If a person has a deficiency in any of the
virtues of vairãgya, brahmacharya, shraddhã, non-violence and
ãtmã-realisation, then he does not attain ultimate liberation, i.e.,
God’s Akshardhãm; instead, he attains some other abode of God. If
he has even more worldly desires remaining, he attains the realms of
the deities, which, in the Moksh-dharma, are described as being like
narak compared to the abode of God. Then, after being a deity, he
returns to being a human, and from being a human he again
becomes a deity. The verse ‘•Ÿ∑§¡ã◊‚¢Á‚hSÃÃÙ ÿÊÁÃ ¬⁄UÊ¢ ªÁÃ◊˜H’i
explains that a devotee of God who has worldly desires does not go to
narak, nor does he have to undergo births and deaths in the cycle of
8.4 million life forms3; instead, he takes innumerable births as a
deity and a human being. Then, only when he develops the
previously described virtues of vairãgya, brahmacharya, etc., does he
become worthy of attaining the grace of God. He then becomes an
ekãntik bhakta of God and attains His gunãtit abode, Akshardhãm.

8

“Hence, whether it takes one life or innumerable lives, only
when one develops the previously described characteristics and
becomes extremely free of worldly desires, does one become worthy of
attaining the grace of God, and only then will one attain ultimate
liberation. Without it, one will definitely not attain it.”

9

Then Nrusinhãnand Swãmi asked, “Is there a method by which
one can eradicate all of one’s deficiencies within this very lifetime?”

10

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “If a person becomes extremely vigilant
and determined, then all of his deficiencies can be eradicated within
this very lifetime. If his deficiencies have not been eradicated while
alive, and if he were to become free of worldly desires and develop
intense love for God during his last moments, then even in those last
moments God would shower His grace upon him, and he would attain
the abode of God.

11

“Thus, whether after one life, or after countless lives, or even in
the last moments before one dies, should a devotee’s vruttis become

i Aneka-janma-sansiddhas-tatoh yãti parãm gatim||

[A yogi who…] has become realised after many lives attains the highest state of
enlightenment.
Bhagwad Gitã: 6.45

The Vachanãmrut

190

intensely focused on God, no deficiency would remain in that
devotee.”
|| Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur-11 || 89 ||

Sãrangpur-12
Thinking about the Ãtmã
1

On Bhãdarvã sudi 1, Samvat 1877 [8 September 1820], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot on
the veranda outside the north-facing rooms of Jivã Khãchar’s darbãr
in Sãrangpur. He was dressed entirely in white clothes. At that
time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees from various places
had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Nirvikãrãnand Swãmi asked a question: “Which
virtues constantly remain in a sãdhu, and which virtues come and
go?”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “First, there is ãtmã-realisation; second,
swadharma; and third, faith in God. These three virtues constantly
remain in a sãdhu, whereas other virtues may come and may go.
Thus, while other virtues come and go, these three virtues always
remain.”

4

Thereafter Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Why is it that even after
understanding the distinction between the body and the ãtmã, one
forgets that distinction and continues to identify oneself with the
body?”

5

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “Once a person has clearly understood
the distinction between the body and the ãtmã, it cannot be forgotten.
Even if he believes, ‘I am the body,’ he can no longer accept himself
as the body. Also, once he has firmly established the conviction of
God, even if he tries to discard it, it cannot be discarded.
Furthermore, the notion that his realisation of himself as ãtmã has
been lost and the belief that he is the body has begun to prevail is
simply a misconception of his mind; the belief never actually returns.
Such a devotee with perfect gnãn is conscious only of his ãtmã. Also,
he believes his ãtmã to be brahmarup and that Purushottam
Bhagwãn – also known as Parabrahma – forever resides in that
brahmarup ãtmã. Also, his conviction of God remains forever
steady.”
The Vachanãmrut

191

6

Then Swayamprakãshãnand Swãmi asked, “How should one
think of one’s ãtmã?”

7

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “When the drashtã, i.e., the jivãtmã,
focuses on the antahkaran, it becomes oblivious to the outer, physical
body and all of the vishays related to it. Then, with the thought that
rests between the antahkaran and the drashtã, one should realise the
nature of the man, the buddhi, the chitt and the ahamkãr. Then,
observing the various thoughts within the antahkaran through such
a thought process, only when those thoughts cease should one
meditate on God’s form. However, as long as those thoughts and
desires persist, one should keep observing them, but one should not
engage in meditation at that time.

8

“In addition, when the five gnãn-indriyas of the outer, physical
body are drawn towards their respective vishays, one should think in
two ways: Firstly, one should think about the vishay towards which
the indriyas have been drawn; secondly, one should think about the
drashtã who watches from the indriyas’ organs. Then, when the
former thought of the vishay and the latter thought of the drashtã
merge into one, one’s vrutti becomes completely detached from the
vishays. However, if one does not think in this way and attempts to
break one’s vrutti from the vishays forcefully, then the vrutti’s
attraction towards the vishays will not be eradicated. On the other
hand, if one withdraws one’s vrutti by applying this thought process,
one’s vrutti will never again become attached to the vishays.
Therefore, as long as one’s indriyas’ vruttis have affection for the
vishays, one should avoid meditating on God. Only when the
indriyas’ vruttis become stable should one engage in the meditation
of God.

9

“Also, when the drashtã is active in the outer sthul body, one
should be absolutely clear in making the distinction that when one is
active in the sthul body one should never look towards the desires
arising in the sukshma body, and when one is active in the
antahkaran, one should become oblivious of one’s sthul body.
Moreover, using the thought which rests between the drashtã and
drashya, one should realise, ‘The drashtã and drashya are absolutely
distinct.’ With this understanding, one should ascribe the attributes
of the body unto the body and the attributes of the drashtã – which is
chaitanya – unto chaitanya.
Also, childhood, youth, old age,
stoutness, thinness, birth and death are all aspects of the body; so
The Vachanãmrut

192

they should never be thought of as belonging to the ãtmã. On the
other hand, being uncuttable, being unpierceable, not aging, being
immortal, being the embodiment of gnãn, being the embodiment of
bliss, and being characterised by eternal existence are all aspects of
the ãtmã; they should in no way be considered to belong to the body.
Instead, those attributes should be understood to belong to the ãtmã.
10

“Such thoughts should not be abandoned as long as desires and
thoughts persist in the antahkaran. Take the example of a king: As
long as he is confronted by an enemy, he cannot preside on his throne
in peace, nor does he indulge in any pleasures. Only when all of his
enemies are conquered does he enjoy the luxuries of his kingdom.
Similarly, a devotee of God should firmly keep the aforementioned
thought as long as the enemies in the form of his mind and indriyas
continue to trouble him. Only when all desires of his mind and
indriyas have subsided should he meditate on God.”
|| Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur-12 || 90 ||

Sãrangpur-13
Losing Faith and Not Losing Faith
1

On Bhãdarvã sudi 2, Samvat 1877 [9 September 1820], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot on
the veranda outside the north-facing rooms of Jivã Khãchar’s darbãr
in Sãrangpur. He was dressed entirely in white clothes. At that
time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees from various places
had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Can a person who
previously had faith in God, but later lost it, really be said to have
had faith in the first place?”

3

Swayamprakãshãnand Swãmi replied, “If a person has developed
faith within his jivãtmã, he would not lose it by any means.
However, if his faith is based on the writings in the scriptures, then
when God performs some action that is not mentioned in the
scriptures, he would lose his faith in God.”

4

Hearing this, Shriji Mahãrãj counter-questioned: “In the
scriptures, there are an endless variety of talks describing God as
being powerful as well as weak, as being the all-doer as well as a nondoer, etc. So then, which action not mentioned in the scriptures
The Vachanãmrut

193

could God possibly have performed that one loses one’s faith? Please
answer this question.”
5

The munis replied, “No action of God is outside the scriptures.
So, Mahãrãj, what is the reason behind a person developing faith and
then losing it?”

6

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “Whosoever develops faith in God does
so only through the scriptures. Why? Because the scriptures
describe the characteristics of God as well as the characteristics of
the Sant. So, only faith developed through the scriptures remains
staunch. On the other hand, faith developed by one’s own mind,
without the help of the scriptures, eventually dissolves.

7

“In fact, the scriptures are also the inspiration behind the
activities of dharma. Even the fact that an ignorant person who has
never heard the scriptures has been able to observe to this day the
disciplines of dharma in the form of making distinctions between his
mother, sister, daughter and other women is due to the scriptures.
How is that? Well, it has been passed down through the generations
after someone initially heard such a talk from the scriptures. From
that it has spread throughout society through successive generations.
Therefore, one who develops faith in God and loses it afterwards has
no faith in the words of the scriptures. Such a person is obstinate
and a nãstik.

8

“On the other hand, if one does have faith in the scriptures, one
would never turn away from God. Why? Because the scriptures
describe an endless variety of divine actions and incidents of God; so,
regardless of which action God performs, it will never be outside of
the scriptures. Therefore, only one who has faith in the scriptures is
able to develop unshakeable faith in God, and only such a person
attains liberation. In addition, such a person would never deviate
from dharma.”
|| Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur-13 || 91 ||

Sãrangpur-14
Laziness and Infatuation
1

On Bhãdarvã sudi 3, Samvat 1877 [10 September 1820], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting facing west on a large,
decorated cot on the veranda outside the rooms of Jivã Khãchar’s
The Vachanãmrut

194

darbãr in Sãrangpur. He was wearing a black-bordered, white khes
and had covered Himself with a white cotton cloth. He had also tied
a white pãgh around His head. Bunches of yellow flowers adorned
His ears, and tassels of yellow flowers had been placed upon His
pãgh. In addition to this, a garland of yellow flowers was swinging
from His neck down to His navel. At that time, an assembly of
munis as well as devotees from various places had gathered before
Him.
2

Thereupon Swayamprakãshãnand Swãmi asked a question: “It
is said in the Gitã that once a devotee attains the abode of God, i.e.,
Vaikunth, etc., he never falls back from it. But which flaw causes
some to fall back?”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj asked in return, “Who has attained the abode of
God and then fallen back? Give Me even one example!”

4

Swayamprakãshãnand Swãmi replied, “First of all, there are
Jay and Vijay, the attendants of God who fell from Vaikunth; and
then there are Rãdhikãji and Shridãmã, who fell from Golok.”

5

Shriji Mahãrãj then clarified, “Jay and Vijay did fall, but it was
only because God wanted to illustrate the glory of a sãdhu; that is, if
one maligns a sãdhu like the Sanakãdik, then even if one has
attained an abode such as Vaikunth, one can still fall from it. That
is why they fell. Besides, Jay and Vijay did return to God’s abode,
Vaikunth, in their third life. Therefore, they cannot be said to have
fallen. Rather, it happened because it was God’s wish. In any case,
one can only be said to have fallen when one never again retains any
contact with God.

6

“Also, when Rãdhikãji fell from Golok, that too was by God’s
wish, as he himself wished to manifest in a human body to uplift
countless jivas and perform redemptive actions. Thus, if someone
claims that Rãdhikãji fell, then God could be said to have fallen along
with her. That is why she cannot be said to have fallen, because it
was God’s wish that they both came to earth from Golok. So, in that
instance, it should be recognised as being the wish of God only.

7

“Of course, if it is His wish, a mukta may manifest in a body
even from Akshardhãm. Moreover, by His will, that which is jad can
become chaitanya, and that which is chaitanya can become jad. God
is, after all, extremely powerful, and whatever He wishes, occurs.
Therefore, no one who has attained the abode of God falls back from it
The Vachanãmrut

195

without it being God’s wish. However, he who does fall is a worldly,
incomplete devotee who falls during the course of his spiritual
endeavours. Such a person is called ‘yoga-bhrasht’. In contrast,
those who have become enlightened through vairãgya, ãtmãrealisation, bhakti towards God, brahmacharya, etc., are equal to the
muktas of Shwetdwip. They never fall.”
8

9

Having explained this, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Here, now I shall
ask a question.”
The munis responded, “Please do ask.”

10

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “In the Udyog-parva of the
Mahãbhãrat, Sanatsujãt Rishi says to Dhrutrãshtra, ‘He who
abandons both laziness and infatuation has completely transgressed
God’s mãyã. In fact, laziness and infatuation are mãyã itself.’ Now,
we are known to be renunciant devotees of God. If someone amongst
us has laziness and infatuation, and if that person is not particularly
vigilant in eradicating them by using the strength of God’s glory,
then what type of bliss does such a devotee experience in this body?
Also, what type of bliss does he attain after he dies? That is My
question.”

11

Swayamprakãshãnand Swãmi replied, “A person who is a
devotee of God need not worry too much if his laziness and
infatuation are not eradicated by the deep thought of God’s glory.”

12

At that point Shriji Mahãrãj questioned, “What is wrong with a
devotee of God who has laziness and infatuation and is vigilant in his
efforts to eradicate them? What makes one who is not so vigilant
better than the one who is?”

13

Swayamprakãshãnand Swãmi explained, “That devotee of God
relies on the strength of God, not on the strength of his spiritual
endeavours; that is why he is better.”

14

Shriji Mahãrãj questioned further, “You are claiming that one
who is careless, despite the enemies of laziness and infatuation being
prevalent in him, is superior. Well, consider the example of a faithful
wife. Due to the fear of her husband and the fear of preserving her
fidelity, she remains very conscious in her mind, lest she smiles at or
touches another man. Moreover, in her mind lies the following fear:
‘If I behave permissively, my husband will think of me as an
adulteress and will no longer accept my service. This would be a
breach of my fidelity.’ Bearing this in mind, she remains ever
The Vachanãmrut

196

vigilant. Now you are claiming that a devotee who keeps bhakti just
like the faithful wife and who is conscious in his efforts to eradicate
laziness and infatuation is at fault. Furthermore, you are suggesting
that a devotee who is not concerned about eradicating laziness and
infatuation, like a woman who flirts with any man she fancies and is
not concerned about preserving her fidelity, is actually superior! Is
this because of a misunderstanding on your behalf, or what?
15

“Remember, if a person remains careless, then even if he is a
devotee of God, the two enemies of laziness and infatuation would not
fail to hinder him. For example, when one drinks alcohol or bhang,
then just as a non-believer becomes intoxicated, a devotee of God
would also become intoxicated and delirious. In the same manner,
just as alcohol and bhang in the form of laziness and infatuation
hinder a non-believer, they hinder a devotee of God as well. The only
difference, however, between a non-believer and a devotee of God is
that a non-believer cannot eradicate these two enemies, whereas a
devotee can overcome them if he remains vigilant in his efforts. That
is the advantage a devotee of God has. Nevertheless, he is not better
if he remains careless, even if he is a devotee of God.”

16

Thereafter, Shriji Mahãrãj asked another question: “How many
elements is the sthul body composed of, and how many elements is
the sukshma body composed of? Are there equal elements in both, or
does one have more or less than the other? Please describe the
nature of these two bodies.”

17

Swayamprakãshãnand Swãmi attempted to answer the
question, but was unable to do so satisfactorily. Thereupon, all of the
munis said, “Mahãrãj, please be kind enough to answer this question
Yourself.”

18

Shriji Mahãrãj then explained, “The sthul body is composed of
the five elements known as the five mahãbhutsi : pruthvi, jal, etc.
The sukshma body is composed of 19 elements: the five gnãnindriyas, the five karma-indriyas, the five prãns and the four
antahkarans. Yet, only when the sukshma body is interwoven with
the sthul body can all activities be carried out properly, but not
otherwise. This is because only when the sukshma body, together
with the indriyas, joins the sthul body – which includes the indriyas’
i Refers to ‘panchbhuts’.

The Vachanãmrut

197

organs, i.e., the eyes, ears, etc. – can the respective vishays of those
indriyas be indulged in. This is not possible by the indriyas’ organs
of the sthul body alone. Thus, the sukshma body composed of the 19
elements is interwoven with the sthul body composed of the five
elements. That is why the sthul body is also said to be composed of
24 elements2.
19

“In the same manner, the pleasures of the sukshma body can
only be indulged in when the sukshma body behaves as one with the
sthul body, which is composed of the five elements. That is why the
sukshma body, which is composed of 19 elements, is also said to be
composed of 24 elements. Moreover, because the sthul body is
inherent within the sukshma body, when a person associates with a
woman through his sukshma body, he ejaculates semen from his
sthul body. Thus, there is oneness between the sthul body and the
sukshma body during the waking state and the dream state.”

20

Thereupon the munis remarked, “Mahãrãj, this suggests that
the sukshma body is the same as the sthul body. So, just as there is
an effect of karmas on the sthul body, is there a similar effect on the
sukshma body as well? Or is there a difference?”

21

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “If one has just as strong a belief that the
sukshma body is mine, as one has that this sthul body is mine, then
the law of karmas would apply to the sukshma body just as it does to
the sthul body. Indeed, it is only to encourage the individual that the
karmas of the sukshma body have been said to be insignificant.

22

“In comparison, neither the sthul body nor the sukshma body of
one who has no consciousness of his sthul and sukshma bodies is
affected by karmas. This is because such a person behaves only as
the ãtmã. Thus, one who has such realisation of one’s ãtmã remains
unaffected by karmas related to the sthul and sukshma bodies.
Nonetheless, such a person would never physically perform any
impure karmas. Furthermore, he endures any joy or pain resulting
from his prãrabdha. Even while experiencing them, he believes, ‘I
am not the one who experiences; I am the ãtmã.’

23

“Conversely, a person who is ignorant and who identifies his self
with the body is affected by all karmas related to the sthul and
sukshma bodies, and therefore he experiences joy and pain according
to his karmas.
This is because an ignorant person, while
experiencing whichever vishays he indulges in, believes the body to
The Vachanãmrut

198

be his true form, and feels, ‘I am the one who experiences these
vishays.’
24

“Then, in his final moments, such an ignorant person sees the
servants of Yam. He then becomes unaware of his body and enters a
state of unconsciousness. Thereafter, the servants of Yam force him
to leave his body and thus separate his jiva. The jiva then receives
the body of an evil spirit, in which it suffers the torments of
Yampuri. A devotee of God possessing gnãn, on the other hand, sees
God or His Sant in his last moments. He also becomes unaware of
his body and enters a state of unconsciousness. However, when that
devotee discards his body and becomes separate from it, God grants
him a divine body like that of God, with which he resides in the abode
of God.”
|| Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur-14 || 92 ||

Sãrangpur-15
Obstinate, Mediocre and Mature Gopis
1

On Bhãdarvã sudi 4, Samvat 1877 [11 September 1820], Shriji
Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot on the veranda outside
the rooms of Jivã Khãchar’s darbãr in Sãrangpur. He was dressed
entirely in white clothes. At that time, an assembly of munis as well
as devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Here, I shall ask a question.
There are two types of devotees of God: One has such deep love for
God that he cannot bear even a second without His darshan. His
love is very obviously noticeable. Another devotee of God possesses
knowledge of the ãtmã as well as total vairãgya. He also has love for
God, but his love does not appear to be like the love of the previously
mentioned devotee. Furthermore, although the former devotee’s
bhakti is extremely appealing, he possesses neither knowledge of the
ãtmã nor vairãgya. The latter may have knowledge of the ãtmã and
vairãgya, but his bhakti is not as appealing as the former devotee’s.
Of these two devotees, whose bhakti is superior, and whose bhakti is
inferior? That is the question.”

3

To this, Swayamprakãshãnand Swãmi replied, “He who has
intense love for God is better, even if he does not have knowledge of
the ãtmã and vairãgya.”
The Vachanãmrut

199

4

Shriji Mahãrãj then countered, “With what understanding do
you say that he who does not have knowledge of the ãtmã and
vairãgya is better? Such a person believes his self to be the body, and
so whenever he comes upon any of the panchvishays that comfort his
body, he will develop affection for them. Consequently, his love for
God will diminish. So why do you consider him to be superior?”

5

Swayamprakãshãnand Swãmi clarified, “I do not consider one
who develops affection for the vishays to be a devotee who loves God;
rather, I consider one who is like the gopis to be such a devotee.”

6

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “The gopis were not so
naïve. They were so wise that their wisdom could transcend the
understanding of those who do possess knowledge of the ãtmã and
vairãgya. They also spoke as eloquently as those who are well-versed
in diplomacy. In addition, they knew God precisely as he should be
known. Even Uddhav, the wisest of the Yãdavs and God’s agent,
became overwhelmed when he realised the gopis’ understanding.
That same Uddhavji later said, ‘God has shown great mercy to me by
sending me to impart gnãn to the gopis.’ He had actually gone to
preach to the gopis, but upon hearing their words, he himself
imbibed the gopis’ preaching.

7

“Though you may say that the gopis were not very intelligent,
there were, in fact, three distinctions amongst them: obstinate,
mediocre, and mature.

8

“Of these, the characteristics of the obstinate gopis are as
follows: They would often rebuke God and say, ‘We have gone out of
our way doing things for you, yet you do not take even the slightest
notice of us.’ Furthermore, if they were teased further, they would be
upset with God and speak such harsh words that one would feel they
will soon fall from the path of God. Those gopis who are described as
such in the scriptures should be known as obstinate gopis.

9

“Those who are mediocre gopis, however, would never become
angry with God and would never speak such harsh words. But by
using their shrewdness, they would employ cunning ploys to conceal
their selfishness from others and do whatever they please while also
doing whatever pleases God; i.e., they would not do only that which
pleases God. Furthermore, even if they have to do something that
pleases only God, they would definitely use a cunning method to do
whatever pleases themselves as well. Those gopis who are described
as such in the scriptures should be known as mediocre gopis.
The Vachanãmrut

200

10

“In comparison, mature gopis would do only that which pleases
God. In no way, though, would they use any cunning methods to
satisfy their selfishness. Their only wish would be to please God.
Therefore, they remain happy with whatever pleases God.
Furthermore, they would never become angry at or jealous of the
gopis who are their equals. They would also renounce vicious
natures such as egotism, matsar, etc., and remain alert in the
service of God. They would never do anything by thought, word or
deed that would displease God. Those gopis who are described as
such in the scriptures should be known as mature gopis. In this
manner, there are three distinctions amongst the gopis.

11

“Overall, the gopis had extreme wisdom in their understanding,
and thus their love cannot be said to be without understanding. Also,
they had thoroughly realised the greatness of God. Due to the power
of that realisation of God’s greatness, the virtues of ãtmã-realisation
and vairãgya naturally flourished in their hearts. Therefore, it was
due to the power of realising God’s greatness that countless
redemptive virtues such as ãtmã-realisation, vairãgya, etc., were
fully developed in the gopis.

12

“Now the characteristics of such a devotee are as follows: He
wishes for only those panchvishays, i.e., sights, sounds, smells,
tastes and touch, which are related to God, but not for those which
are related to anything else. Then through those vishays, he
develops intense affection for God. So much so, that even though he
does not possess the virtues of ãtmã-realisation and vairãgya, he still
does not harbour any desire in his heart except for that of God.

13

“Consider the following example: When it has not rained, the
seeds of different types of grass cannot be seen anywhere on the
earth. But when it does rain, so much grass grows that even the
earth cannot be seen. Similarly, when one who does not possess the
virtues of ãtmã-realisation and vairãgya meets with bad company,
though he may seem to have no desire for vishays other than God, he
will begin to harbour desires for those objects. Furthermore, his
mind will become corrupted, and he will not remember God in his
heart. Instead, he will constantly crave for the vishays. As a result,
that devotee who loves God but does not possess the virtues of ãtmãrealisation and vairãgya will feel, ‘I do not have even the slightest
love for God.’ Thus, a devotee who has love for God but does not

The Vachanãmrut

201

possess the virtues of ãtmã-realisation and vairãgya is extremely
inferior.
14

“In comparison, one who has the virtues of ãtmã-realisation and
vairãgya, even though his love for God seems ordinary, feels, ‘The
form of God is forever present within my jivãtmã.’ Because of this
realisation, he may not seem outwardly enthusiastic for the darshan,
touch, etc., of God’s form; in fact, he may appear to be very quiet.
However, the roots of his love are very deep. Moreover, his love is not
of the type that would diminish due to the influence of bad company.
Therefore, this devotee is superior and is ekãntik.”
|| Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur-15 || 93 ||

Sãrangpur-16
Narnãrãyan’s Austerities
1

On Bhãdarvã sudi 5, Samvat 1877 [12 September 1820], Shriji
Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot on the veranda outside
Jivã Khãchar’s room in Sãrangpur. He was dressed entirely in white
clothes. At that time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees from
various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Paramãnand Swãmi asked a question: “It is said in
the Shrimad Bhãgwat, ‘While residing in Badrikãshram, Shri
Narnãrãyan is performing austerities for the sake of the liberation
and happiness of all of the people in Bharat-khand.’ Why is it, then,
that everyone does not tread the path of liberation?”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “The answer lies in the fifth canto of
the Shrimad Bhãgwat. It is said therein, ‘God is performing
austerities, but he does so only for the sake of his devotees, not for
those who are not devotees of God.’

4

“Shri Narnãrãyan Bhagwãn, who is clad in the attire of an
ascetic, performs harsh austerities out of extreme compassion for and
for the benefit of those people who realise the rarity of attaining a
human body in this Bharat-khand and thus attain the refuge of God
and offer bhakti to him. While performing such austerities, and
endowed with the virtues of dharma, gnãn, vairãgya, upsham, divine
powers, etc. that are constantly inherent in him to a great extent, he
dwells in Badrikãshram until the dissolution of the cosmos. Thus,
even if his devotees who live in Bharat-khand may possess the
The Vachanãmrut

202

virtues of dharma, gnãn, etc. to a lesser degree, they flourish greatly
in just a short span of time due to the power of God’s virtuous
austerities. Thereafter, by the will of God, such devotees have the
darshan of the manifest form of Shri Krishna Bhagwãn amidst the
divine light of Aksharbrahma that is in their hearts. In this way,
due to God’s austerities, devotees attain liberation without any
hindrances. However, those who are not devotees of God do not
attain liberation. This is the answer to your question.”
|| Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur-16 || 94 ||

Sãrangpur-17
Differences among Muktas;
The Branch of a Tamarind Tree
1

On the evening of Bhãdarvã sudi 6, Samvat 1877 [13 September
1820], Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting facing north on a large, decorated
cot on the veranda outside the rooms of Jivã Khãchar’s darbãr in
Sãrangpur. He was dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time,
an assembly of munis as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “As the vision of a person who
worships God becomes increasingly subtle, he realises the unlimited
nature of God, and he increasingly realises the greatness of God.
When that devotee identifies himself with the body, he sees God as
the witness of his waking, dream and deep sleep states. Later, when
he realises himself as transcending the waking, dream and deep sleep
states, he realises God as transcending them too. Then, as his vision
becomes increasingly subtle, he realises God as being far beyond
himself and understands the greatness of God even more. Then, as
his vrutti attaches itself more and more to God with love, his
upãsanã of God becomes even more firmly established.

3

“For example, ants, birds, men, cattle, horses, elephants, large
crocodiles and fish all drink water from the ocean and become
healthy; yet the ocean’s level is not even slightly reduced. Thus, the
greater the capacity of the being, the more it realises the vastness of
the ocean.

4

“Here is another example: a mosquito, a sparrow, a kite, a
hawk, an analpakshi and Garud all fly in the sky, yet to all of them
The Vachanãmrut

203

the sky is limitless. However, the greater the strength of their
wings, the more they realise the vastness of the sky and their own
inferiority.
5

“Similarly, a devotee whose upãsanã is like that of Marichi and
the other prajãpatis can be compared to the mosquito. A devotee
whose upãsanã is higher, like that of deities such as Brahmã, can be
compared to the sparrow. A devotee whose upãsanã is higher still,
like that of deities such as Virãt-Purush, can be compared to a kite.
A devotee whose upãsanã is higher still, like that of Pradhãn-Purush,
can be compared to a hawk. A devotee whose upãsanã is still higher,
like that of pure Prakruti-Purush, can be compared to an analpakshi.
A devotee whose upãsanã is even higher, like that of an aksharmukta in Akshardhãm, is like Garud. As the powers of these
devotees increase, they realise the greatness of God more and more.
Moreover, as their own powers increase, their master-servant
relationship with God is also consolidated.

6

“Also, when the person engaged in worship identified himself
with the jiva, the jiva possessed the luminosity of a firefly. As he
continued worshipping God, barriers were gradually overcome, and
he became increasingly luminous; first like an oil lamp, then like a
torch, then like the flames of a fire, then like the flames of a forest
fire, then like lightning, then like the moon, then like the sun, then
like the fire of dissolution, and finally, he became as radiant as the
transcendental lighti .

7

“In this manner, the luminosity, powers and bliss of such a
devotee constantly increase. In the example, the succession from
firefly to transcendental light refers to the differences among the level
of the muktas. As one reaches a higher spiritual state, God’s
greatness is realised to a greater extent and one attains a higher
mukta-level.”

8

So saying, Shriji Mahãrãj bid ‘Jai Sachchidãnand’ to everyone
and stood up. Then, holding a branch of the tamarind tree, He stood
facing east and said, “From here, the full moon appears like a small
plate. But as one approaches it, it appears to get increasingly larger.
Then, when one comes extremely close to it, it becomes so vast that
one is unable to see its limits. Similarly, as obstacles in the form of
i Here, ‘transcendental light’ refers to the light of an akshar-mukta.

The Vachanãmrut

204

mãyã are overcome, and one increasingly attains the proximity of
God, one realises the unlimited greatness of God, and one’s sense of
servitude towards Him is increasingly strengthened.”
|| Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur-17 || 95 ||

Sãrangpur-18
Saline Land
1

On Bhãdarvã sudi 8, Samvat 1877 [15 September 1820], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting facing north on the veranda
outside the north-facing rooms of Jivã Khãchar’s darbãr in
Sãrangpur. He was wearing a white khes and had covered Himself
with a white cotton cloth. He had also tied a white pãgh around His
head. At that time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees from
various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “If a person with shraddhã
encounters the company of a true Sant and develops shraddhã in the
words of that Sant, then all of the redemptive virtues of swadharma,
vairãgya, gnãn, bhakti, wisdom, etc., would develop in his heart, and
the vicious natures of lust, anger, etc., would be burnt away.
Conversely, if he encounters evil company, and if he develops
shraddhã in their words, then all of the virtues of vairãgya, wisdom,
etc., would be destroyed. It is rather like the analogy of saline land.
No matter how much rain falls upon it, no grass, or anything else,
can grow upon it. However, if a flood were to sweep across that same
land, then all of the salt would be washed away. As a result, where
there was once salt, there would now be silt. Then, if the seeds of
banyan, pipal, or other trees were to fall into that silt, they would
grow into large trees. Likewise, if a person who has the previously
mentioned virtues of swadharma, vairãgya, etc., firmly rooted in his
heart and who has not even the slightest desire for the pleasures of
this world were to meet with evil company, then waters in the form
of evil company would sweep across his heart and leave behind silt in
the form of worldly talks, etc. Subsequently, the seeds of lust, anger,
avarice, infatuation, arrogance, matsar, etc., which are dormant in
the silt, would grow into large trees. Therefore, a devotee of God
should never keep bad company.”

3

Then Shriji Mahãrãj continued, “If a person has some swabhãvs,
and he thoughtfully attempts to eradicate them by associating with
The Vachanãmrut

205

the Sant, then they can be destroyed. However, a person’s vicious
swabhãvs will not be eradicated if he foolishly applies any other
methods. When such a fool becomes depressed, he either sleeps,
cries, takes out his frustrations on someone else, or he may even fast.
He will use any of these four methods to try to overcome his
depression. If he becomes severely depressed, he may even resort to
committing suicide. These are the ways in which a fool attempts to
overcome depression. However, such methods neither reduce the
pain, nor do they eradicate one’s swabhãvs. On the other hand, if one
were to attempt to eradicate them with understanding, then both the
distress and the swabhãv would be eradicated. Thus, only those who
have understanding become happy.”
4

Thereafter, Shriji Mahãrãj continued with another example and
said, “Large flames of a fire are extinguished when water is poured
over it, whereas even a slight flash of lightning can never be
extinguished, even though it is in the midst of dense rain clouds.
Similarly, regardless of how much vairãgya one may have, or how
much love for God one may have, if one does not have understanding,
then like the flames of the fire, all of one’s virtues will be lost due to
water in the form of bad company. In comparison, one who has
vairãgya and love compounded with understanding is like the fire of
lightning. It may be slight, but it is never destroyed.”

5

Thereafter Nirvikãrãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, if a person
has the vicious swabhãvs of lust, anger, etc., can they be eradicated,
or not?”

6

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “Just as a merchant keeps an account of
all his transactions, if one keeps an account of one’s swabhãvs from
the very day one entered the Satsang fellowship, then they can be
eradicated. That is, one should think, ‘When I was not in Satsang, I
had these vicious swabhãvs. But ever since I have entered Satsang,
they have diminished.’ Thereafter, every year one should check to
see if one has progressed or if there is still some deficiency remaining.
However, a fool does not keep an account like the merchant does.
Thus, any swabhãv which one may have can be eradicated if one
continuously examines oneself while doing satsang.”

7

Thereupon Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “If one keeps bad company
then it is obvious that one will develop vicious swabhãvs. But why is
it that such vicious swabhãvs arise even after one associates with the
Sant?”
The Vachanãmrut

206

8

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “During one’s childhood, one does not
face the inner enemies of lust, anger, avarice, etc. Moreover, at that
age, one also tends to have more love for God. However, when one
enters youth, the inner enemies of lust, anger, etc., increase along
with the belief that one is the body. If during that period one keeps
the company of a sãdhu who does not have vicious natures such as
lust, the belief that one is the body, etc., then one will cross the ocean
of youth. However, if the youth does not do this, the inner enemies of
lust, anger, etc., will defeat him, and he will consequently turn vile.

9

“However, if an older person is spoilt while doing satsang, it is
because whichever faults he perceives in the great Purush all return
to dwell in his own heart. Conversely, if one imbibes the virtues of
the great Purush and thinks: ‘Any swabhãv the great Purush
exhibits is only for the sake of the jivas’ liberation. He is, in fact,
flawless; but my perceiving flaws in him is, in fact, due to my own
personal foolishness’ – and thinking thus, if he imbibes the virtues of
the Satpurush and asks for forgiveness for his mistakes, then the
deficiencies of that person will diminish.”

10

Thereafter Mahãnubhãvãnand Swãmi asked, “Can rãjasik,
tãmasik and sãttvik swabhãvs be eradicated by doing satsang?”

11

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “All swabhãvs can be eradicated if one
tries to eradicate them.”

12

Muktãnand Swãmi asked further, “If that is the case, then
despite the fact that Durvãsã and others have become muktas, why
do they still remain tãmasik?”

13

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “The gunas of tamogun, etc., which
are seen in Durvãsã and others are only present because they choose
to keep them. They feel, ‘If someone is misbehaving, tamogun is
actually very necessary in order to reprimand him. That is why we
keep it.’ Thus, they purposefully retain such gunas. Nevertheless,
when a swabhãv is prevalent in oneself, one should bear an aversion
towards it. One should think, ‘I am a devotee of God and such a
vicious swabhãv does not befit me.’ In this way, by the grace of God,
one’s swabhãvs can be eradicated if one regards them as flaws and
strives to discard them.”
|| Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur-18 || 96 ||

The Vachanãmrut

207

|| End of Sãrangpur Section ||

The Vachanãmrut

208

The Vachanãmrut

209

KÃRIYÃNI SECTION
Kãriyãni-1
A Worm and a Bee
1

On Bhãdarvã sudi 12, Samvat 1877 [19 September 1820], a
decorated, canopied cot that had been brought by Jãdavji, a devotee
from Surat, had been placed on the veranda outside the north-facing
rooms of Vastã Khãchar’s darbãr in Kãriyãni. A mattress with a
white, silken cover had been placed upon that cot. A white,
cylindrical cushion and red, silken knee-cushions had been placed on
top of the cushion. Also, frills of golden fabric were dangling on all
four sides of the cot. Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting facing north on this
beautifully decorated cot. He was wearing a black-bordered, white
khes and had tied a golden-bordered, white feto around His head. He
had also covered Himself with a golden-bordered shelu. At that time,
an assembly of munis as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him. They were all enjoying the darshan of Shriji
Mahãrãj and were captivated by His charming appearance.

2

Then Shriji Mahãrãj said to the paramhansas, “Please ask and
answer questions amongst yourselves.”

3

Thereupon Bhudharãnand Swãmi asked, “Does the conviction of
God arise in the antahkaran or in the jiva?”

4

Shivãnand Swãmi attempted to answer the question, but was
unable to do so satisfactorily.

5

So Shriji Mahãrãj said, “The jiva knows through the buddhi,
which is the cause of alli and is greater than all. That buddhi
resides in the man, in the chitt, in the ahamkãr, in the ears, in the
eyes, in the nose, in the tongue, in the mouth, in the skin, in the
arms, in the legs, in the genitals and in the anus. It resides in the
body in this manner, pervading it from head to toe. The jiva resides
within this buddhi, but the jiva is not felt; only the buddhi is felt.
i All knowledge

The Vachanãmrut

210

6

“The following example will illustrate this: When the flames of a
fire rise and fall, they do so because of the wind. The rise and fall of
the flames are apparent, but the wind is not apparent. Also, when
dung is placed in fire, the dung begins to burn. Then, when it is
placed where there is no wind, smoke begins to rise. At that time,
the rising smoke is apparent, but the wind within is not apparent.
Also, the clouds that move in the sky are seen to do so because of the
wind. But the wind that resides within them is not apparent. In
this way, flames, smoke and the clouds represent the buddhi, and
the wind represents the jiva.

7

“What is that jiva like? Well, it is the knower of the convictions
formed by the buddhi; it also knows Brahmã, the cause of the
convictions in the buddhi. It perceives the thoughts of the man, and
also perceives Chandra, the cause of those thoughts in the man. It
perceives the contemplation of the chitt, and also perceives Vãsudev,
the cause of the contemplation in the chitt. It perceives the I-ness of
the ahamkãr, and also perceives Rudra, the cause of that I-ness. In
this manner, the jiva perceives the four antahkarans, the ten
indriyas, their vishays and the presiding deities, who allow one to
discriminate among those vishays. Moreover, it does all of this
simultaneously.

8

“That jiva appears to be in one place; it appears to be as fine as
the tip of a spear; and it appears to be extremely subtle. It appears so
because it is associated with the buddhi. But when that jiva is
known as the illuminator of the body, indriyas, antahkaran, their
presiding deities and the vishays, it appears to be extremely vast, and
it appears to be pervasive. That is when it is not associated with the
buddhi.

9

“That jiva is known not by the indriyas, but by inference. For
example, on seeing a sword weighing 200 kg, a person can infer, ‘The
wielder of this sword must be extremely strong.’ Similarly, the jiva
inspires the body, indriyas, etc., simultaneously; therefore it must be
very powerful. This is how the jiva can be known by inference.”
Shriji Mahãrãj answered the question in this manner.

10

Nityãnand Swãmi then asked, “Mahãrãj, what is the answer to
the original question in what You have just said?”

11

Shriji Mahãrãj clarified, “Well, the answer is that when the
conviction of God has developed in the buddhi, one should realise that
that conviction has also developed within the jiva. How does that
The Vachanãmrut

211

happen? Well, the conviction initially develops in the indriyas, then
in the ahamkãr, then in the chitt, then in the man, then in the
buddhi, and then finally, it develops in the jiva.” Shriji Mahãrãj
replied in this manner.
12

Again Nityãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, how can one know
when there is conviction of God in the indriyas? How can one know
when there is conviction of God in the antahkaran? How can one
know when there is conviction of God within the jiva?”

13

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “The conviction of God which is in the
indriyas should be known as follows: Of all of the objects in this
world which are seen, heard, smelt or touched, some are pleasant and
some are unpleasant; some give pleasure and some give misery; some
are liked and some are disliked; some are appropriate and some are
inappropriate. If no doubts arise even when all of these aspects are
apparent in God, that should be known to be the conviction of God in
the indriyas.

14

“Further, of the various effects of the three gunas of sattvagun,
rajogun and tamogun, the effect of tamogun is laziness, sleep, etc.;
the effect of rajogun is lust, anger, etc.; and the effect of sattvagun is
tranquillity, self-restraint, etc. If no doubts arise even when all of
these are noticed in God, then that should be known as the conviction
of God in the antahkaran.

15

“Due to nirvikalp samãdhi, Rushabhdev Bhagwãn wandered
eccentrically, keeping a stone in his mouth. Although his body
burned in a forest fire, he remained totally unaware of it. So, if no
doubts arise even when such a gunãtit state is apparent in God, then
that should be known as conviction of God in the jiva.

16

“For example, ships which travel in the sea carry an iron anchor
with them. When thrown into the sea, if that anchor is immediately
retracted before it reaches the seabed, then not much effort is
required; it comes out immediately. However, if it is allowed to reach
the seabed before it is retracted, then it comes out only after much
effort. But if it is allowed to descend gradually, and it settles and
lodges itself into the seabed, then it cannot be pulled up by any
means; it cannot be retracted. Similarly, when a person develops the
conviction of God in his jiva, that conviction cannot be dislodged in
any way whatsoever.” In this way, Shriji Mahãrãj spoke at length,
but only a small portion has been mentioned here.
The Vachanãmrut

212

17

Then Chaitanyãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, God is beyond the
mind and speech; He is gunãtit. How, then, can the mãyik indriyas
and antahkaran perceive Him?”

18

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “When the jiva – the knower of the body,
indriyas and antahkaran – becomes eclipsed during the state of deep
sleep, its indriyas and antahkaran also become eclipsed in that deep
sleep. At that time, God inspires that jiva. When the jiva enters the
dream state from the state of deep sleep, the dream-related locations,
pleasures, vishays and the jiva are all inspired by God. He inspires
them during the waking state as well. In this way, God inspires the
jiva both when it is conscious of the body, and when it is not.
Furthermore, from Pradhãn, mahattattva was formed; from
mahattattva, the three types of ahamkãr were formed; from that
ahamkãr, the indriyas, deities, five bhuts and five tanmãtrãs were
formed; all of these are also inspired by God. Virãt, who is composed
of all these elements combined, is also inspired by God. When all of
these merge into mãyã, then God inspires that mãyã as well.

19

“That God inspires both jiva and ishwar when they identify
themselves with their bodies. He inspires both jiva and ishwar even
when they reside in the state of deep sleep and are eclipsed by
Pradhãn and are without any identity or form. He inspires kãl,
which causes mãyã and other entities to assume an identity and
form, and also causes them to forsake identity and form. So, how can
that God be known by the indriyas and antahkaran? Is that your
question?”

20
21

Everyone confirmed, “Yes, Mahãrãj, that is the question.”
So Shriji Mahãrãj continued, “The answer to that is as follows:
God does not create and sustain the world for His own sake. In fact,
it is said in the Shrimad Bhãgwat:

’ÈhËÁãº˝ÿ◊Ÿ—¬˝ÊáÊÊŸ˜ ¡ŸÊŸÊ◊‚Î¡à¬˝÷—È –
◊ÊòÊÊÕZ ø ÷flÊÕZ ø sÔÊà◊Ÿ˘∑§À¬ŸÊÿ øH i
This verse means: God created the buddhi, indriyas, man and prãns
of all people to enable the jivas to indulge in the vishays, to take
i Buddheendriya-manah-prãnãn janãnãm-asrujat-prabhuhu|

Mãtrãrtham cha bhavãrtham cha hyãtmane’kalpanãya cha||
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 10.87.2

The Vachanãmrut

213

birth, to transmigrate to other realms, and to attain liberation.
Therefore, God created this cosmos for the sake of the jivas’
liberation; God sustains it for the sake of the jivas’ liberation; in fact,
God also causes its dissolution for the sake of the jivas’ liberation.
How is that? Well, He destroys it to allow the jivas – tired as a
result of undergoing many births and deaths – to rest. That God,
who acts in all ways for the benefit of the jivas, becomes like a
human out of compassion. Then, when the jivas maintain profound
association with the Sant of that God, why should they not be able to
know Him? They certainly can know Him.”
22

Thereupon Bhajanãnand Swãmi asked, “Why then, Mahãrãj,
does the Vedic verse claim: ‘ÿÃÙ flÊøÙ ÁŸflÃ¸ãÃ •¬˝Êåÿ ◊Ÿ‚Ê ‚„U’i ?”

23

Shriji Mahãrãj replied in a pleased tone “Well, in that case, the
facts are as follows: pruthvi resides in ãkãsh, but does not become
like ãkãsh; jal also resides in ãkãsh, but does not become like ãkãsh;
tej also resides in ãkãsh, but does not become like ãkãsh; and vãyu
also resides in ãkãsh, but does not become like ãkãsh. In the same
way, the mind and speech do not attain God.”

24

Then Nityãnand Swãmi raised a doubt: “Mahãrãj, the Shrutis
and Smrutis claim: ‘ÁŸ⁄Ü¡Ÿ— ¬⁄◊¢ ‚Êêÿ◊È¬ÒÁÃH’ii and ‘’„UflÙ ôÊÊŸÃ¬‚Ê ¬ÍÃÊ

◊jÊfl◊ÊªÃÊ—H’iii.”
25

Shriji Mahãrãj then said, “What I just mentioned is regarding
the mind and the indriyas of non-devotees. The mind and indriyas of
devotees of God, however, do attain God-realisation. For example, at
i Yato vãcho nivartante aprãpya manasã saha

From where speech returns alo ng with the mind without having attained
[Brahma, i.e. God].
Taittiriya Upanishad: 2.4.1
ii Niranjanaha paramam sãmyam-upaiti||
He who is free from [the] blemishes [of mãyã] attains qualities similar to those of
the Supreme Being, [i.e. God].
Mundaka Upanishad: 3.3.1
iii Bahavo gnãna-tapasã pootã mad-bhãvam-ãgatãhã||
Many who have been purified by austerities in the form of gnãn have attained
my qualities.
Bhagwad Gitã: 4.10

The Vachanãmrut

214

the time of dissolution, pruthvi, which resides in ãkãsh, becomes one
with ãkãsh; jal also becomes one with ãkãsh; tej also becomes one
with ãkãsh; and vãyu also becomes one with ãkãsh. Similarly, the
bodies, indriyas, antahkarans and prãns of those who are devotees of
God, due to their gnãn of God, become like God. This is because
God’s form is itself divine. So, the bodies, indriyas and antahkarans
of those devotees become like God’s indriyas, antahkaran and body.
That is why those devotees’ bodies, indriyas, antahkarans and prãns
become divine.
26

“The following example will clarify: A bee captures a worm,
stings it and then buzzes over it. As a result, that worm – in the
very same body – is transformed into a bee. Thereafter, none of its
bodily parts remain like that of a worm; it becomes exactly like a bee.
Similarly, a devotee of God, in that very same body, becomes divine
like God.”

27

Shriji Mahãrãj then concluded by saying, “The essence of this
talk that I have given is that for both a person with firmness in
bhakti coupled with ãtmã-realisation, and for a person with firmness
in bhakti alone, progress is as described. However, the indriyas and
antahkaran of a person with ãtmã-realisation only, i.e., one who
aspires for keval-gnãn, do not become divine like God’s form; he
attains only brahmasattã.”

28

Having spoken in this way, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Now let us
stop this discourse, and as the assembly has become inert, someone
please sing some pleasing devotional songs.” Saying this, He Himself
sat in meditation, while the sãdhus began singing devotional songs.
|| Vachanãmrut Kãriyãni-1 || 97 ||

Kãriyãni-2
A Cursed Intellect
1

On Ãso sudi 2, Samvat 1877 [9 October 1820], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on the veranda outside the northfacing rooms of Vastã Khãchar’s darbãr in Kãriyãni. He was dressed
entirely in white clothes. At that time, an assembly of paramhansas
as well as devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

The Vachanãmrut

215

2

By Shriji Mahãrãj’s command, the junior paramhansas had
come to the front of the assembly and were asking and answering
questions amongst themselves.

3

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Here, allow Me to ask one
question.”

4

The junior paramhansas responded by saying, “Mahãrãj, please
do ask.”

5

Shriji Mahãrãj then said, “One individual’s intellect is such that
since the day he joined the Satsang fellowship he may occasionally
perceive a flaw in God and the Sant, but it does not persist; it passes
away. Day by day, he may continue perceiving virtues and flaws,
but he never abandons Satsang. Why? Because he is wise and
realises, ‘There is no Sant like this in the entire brahmãnd, and
there is no other God besides this Mahãrãj.’ Because he has realised
this, he remains firm in Satsang. On the other hand, another
individual’s intellect is such that he never perceives a flaw in God or
the Sant. But even though both individuals’ intellects are similar
outwardly and their faith in God is also similar, one individual
continues perceiving flaws, while the other does not. What, then, is
the fault in the intellect of the individual who keeps perceiving flaws?
I put this question to Nãnã Shivãnand Swãmi.”

6

Nãnã Shivãnand Swãmi then attempted to answer the question
but was unable to do so satisfactorily.

7

Then Bhagwadãnand Swãmi said, “That individual’s intellect is
cursed.”

8

At that point, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “He is correct; that is the
correct answer to the question. In this world, do not people say, ‘He
has been cursed by someone’? In the same way, that individual has
been cursed because he may have pained a great Sant, or he may
have hurt a meek person, or he may not have served his parents.
That is why his intellect is the way it is.”

9

Then Bhagwadãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, how can his
cursed intellect be remedied?”

10

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “This piece of cloth which I wear on
My head and a thick cloth like a carpet cannot be washed with the
same amount of effort. Why? Because this thin cloth is cleaned
immediately by washing it with only a small amount of soap. On the
other hand, to wash a thick cloth, it must be soaked in water for two
The Vachanãmrut

216

to four days, then boiled over a fire; only then, after it is washed with
soap, does it become clean. Similarly, if a person whose intellect is
cursed observes niyams only to the extent that everyone else does,
then that flaw will not be eradicated. He should not remain only as
free of lust, taste, avarice, attachment, and egotism as others.
Rather, he should become more free of lust than others; he should
become more free of avarice than others; he should become more free
of taste than others; he should become more free of attachment than
others; and he should become more free of egotism than others. Also,
he should go to sleep later than others; he should chant the name of
God with a rosary more often than others; and he should wake up a
little earlier than others. In this manner, if he observes niyams
more intensely than others, his cursed intellect will be remedied;
otherwise it will not be remedied.”
11

Then Motã Shivãnand Swãmi asked Motã Yogãnand Swãmi a
question: “Do karmas have a form or are they formless?”

12

Motã Yogãnand Swãmi replied, “I do not think I can answer that
question.”

13

Shriji Mahãrãj then replied, “In reality, karmas are without a
form, but the good or bad fruits which result from those karmas do
have a form. Those who claim that karmas have a form are nãstiks.
After all, a karma is an action, and so, it cannot have a form.”

14

Shriji Mahãrãj talked a great deal in this manner, but only a
small portion has been mentioned here.
|| Vachanãmrut Kãriyãni-2 || 98 ||

Kãriyãni-3
Shuk Muni Is a Great Sãdhu;
A Person Cannot Be Known by His Superficial Nature
1

On the evening of Ãso vadi 7, Samvat 1877 [14 October 1820],
Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting facing north on a large, decorated cot on
the veranda outside the north-facing rooms of Vastã Khãchar’s
darbãr in Kãriyãni. He was wearing a white khes and had tied a
white feto around His head. He had also covered Himself with a
white cotton cloth. At that time, an assembly of paramhansas as
well as devotees from various places had gathered before Him.
The Vachanãmrut

217

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “This Shuk Muni is a very great
sãdhu. From the day he began staying with Me, his enthusiasm has
been ever increasing; in fact, it has never diminished. Thus, he is
like Muktãnand Swãmi.”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj then continued, “The affection that people develop
for each other is due to virtues, and the repulsion they experience for
each other is due to faults. But those virtues and faults cannot be
discerned from an individual’s superficial behaviour.
Because,
outwardly, a person may walk like a cat, fixing his eyes on the floor
as he walks, but inside, he may have intense lust. On seeing him
behave in this manner, a person who is not wise would think, ‘He is
a very great sãdhu.’ On the other hand, someone else may walk with
wandering eyes. On seeing him, a person who is not wise would
think, ‘He is a fake sãdhu.’ Inwardly, however, he may be extremely
free of lust. Thus, a person cannot be judged by his superficial,
physical behaviour; only after staying with him can he be judged.
Because by staying with him, his activities can be observed – the way
he talks, the way he walks, the way he eats, the way he drinks, the
way he sleeps, the way he wakes, the way he sits, etc.

4

“Also, virtues and vices are more discernible during the period of
youth, but they are not so obvious during childhood or during old age.
Someone may be spoiled as a child, but as a youth he becomes
virtuous. Conversely, someone may be good in his childhood, but
becomes spoiled during his youth. A person who is determined in
that he feels, ‘It is not good that I am having these base thoughts,’
and who makes an effort to eradicate those thoughts, and who
remains determined until they have been eradicated, progresses in
his youth. On the other hand, one who is complacent instead of being
alert, will not progress. So, a virtuous person like the former can be
recognised from his childhood.”

5

Having said this, Shriji Mahãrãj talked at length about His own
inclination for renunciation in His childhood. He then continued,
“One who is virtuous does not like the company of immature children
from his childhood; he does not have an appetite for tasty food; and he
continuously restrains his body. Just look, when I was a child, I had
the same thoughts as Kãrtik Swãmi; i.e., I felt, ‘I want to eliminate
all of the remnants of My mother – her flesh and blood – from My
body.’ So, after many spiritual endeavours, I emaciated My body so
much that if something pierced My body, water would come out, but
The Vachanãmrut

218

never blood. In this manner, one who is virtuous can be known from
his childhood.”
6

Then Bhajanãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, is it better to
maintain such a thought in one’s mind, or is it better to expose the
body to austerities?”

7

To that Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Some faults are due to the body –
these should be known; and some faults are due to the mind – these
should also be known. Of these, which are the faults of the body?
Well, repeated erections and itching of the genitals, excessive
movement, rapid movement of the eyes, smelling many types of
fragrances quickly, walking 20 or 25 miles quickly, embracing
someone with such force that his bones break, ejaculating semen
during dreams, and so on – all these are faults of the body, not the
mind. Even if these faults of the body are greatly reduced, lustful
desires, as well as desires for eating, drinking, walking, touching,
smelling, hearing and tasting may remain. These should be known
as the faults of the mind. So, the faults of the body and mind should
be distinguished as just mentioned.

8

“Then, the faults of the body should be removed by imposing
bodily restraints.
Thereafter, once the body is weakened, the
remaining faults of the mind should be eradicated by contemplating,
‘I am the ãtmã, separate from desires. In fact, I am completely
blissful.’ One who practises these two methods – bodily restraint and
contemplation of the ãtmã – is a great sãdhu. If one has only bodily
restraint, but does not contemplate, then it is not appropriate.
Conversely, if one only contemplates, but does not restrain one’s body,
then that is also not appropriate. Therefore, one who has both is the
best.
Moreover, if these two methods – bodily restraint and
contemplation – are necessary for even householder satsangis to
practise, then a renunciant should definitely practise them.”

9

Then Nishkulãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, can one remain
like that through contemplation or through vairãgya?”

10

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “One remains like that due to the
company of a great sãdhu. Furthermore, one who is unable to do so
even with the company of a great sãdhu is a grave sinner.”

11

Saying that, Shriji Mahãrãj continued, “If a renunciant desires
to indulge in the worldly pleasures which are appropriate only for a
householder, then he is as good as an animal eating dry grass. Why
The Vachanãmrut

219

is that? Because even though he is never going to acquire those
objects, he still harbours a desire for them. It seems, then, that he
has not understood that fact properly, because, as the saying goes,
what is the point in asking the name of a village which one is not
going to visit? If he does harbour a craving for those objects that he
has renounced, will it be possible for him to obtain them during this
lifetime? He can attain them only if he falls from Satsang, but not
while remaining in Satsang. So, one who maintains a desire for
those pleasures while remaining in Satsang is a fool. Why? Because,
whoever remains in Satsang is required to comply by its injunctions.
For example, if a woman sets out to become a sati but turns back
upon seeing the fire, would her relatives allow her to turn back?
They would force her to burn on her husband’s funeral pyre. Also, if
a Brãhmin lady becomes a widow but continues to dress like a
married woman, will her relations allow it? Certainly they would
not. Thus, one who maintains indecent swabhãvs while remaining
in Satsang has not understood this talk. Because, if he had
understood it, such indecent swabhãvs would not remain.”
12

Saying this, Shriji Mahãrãj bid ‘Jai Swãminãrãyan’ to everyone
and departed to go to sleep.
|| Vachanãmrut Kãriyãni-3 || 99 ||

Kãriyãni-4
Awareness of the Jiva and the Witness
1

Four-and-a-half hours after sunrise on Ãso vadi 8, Samvat 1877
[15 October 1820], Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting on the veranda outside
the north-facing rooms of Vastã Khãchar’s darbãr in Kãriyãni. He
was dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, an assembly of
paramhansas as well as devotees from various places had gathered
before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Please ask and answer
questions amongst yourselves.”

The Vachanãmrut

220

3

So Gopãlãnand Swãmi asked Bhajanãnand Swãmi, “In this
body, how much awareness is of the jiva, and how much awareness is
of the witnessi ?”

4

Bhajanãnand Swãmi attempted to answer the question but was
unable to do so.

5

Shriji Mahãrãj then replied, “The buddhi pervades this body
from head to toe. As a result, it is simultaneously aware of the
activities of all of the indriyas. The jiva resides within that buddhi
by pervading it. So, the awareness of the buddhi is due to the
awareness of the jiva. Similarly, since the witness resides within
that jiva, the jiva’s awareness is due to the witness’s awareness.”

6

Thereafter Nityãnand Swãmi asked Shriji Mahãrãj, “Mahãrãj,
the witness does reside within the jiva. But realising that that which
is a witness must possess a form, the question is how can that which
possesses a form also be pervasive?”

7

Hearing this, Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “That which possesses a
form can also be pervasive. For example, Agnidev possesses a
definite form when residing in his realm, but through his powers, he
is latent within wood. Similarly, God possesses a definite form in His
Akshardhãm, but through His antaryãmi powers, He pervades the
jivas and functions as if He possesses a form. Therefore, even that
antaryãmi form should be considered to possess a form.”
|| Vachanãmrut Kãriyãni-4 || 100 ||

Kãriyãni-5
God’s Purpose for Assuming an Avatãr
1

2

On Ãso vadi 14, Samvat 1877 [4 November 1820], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a canopied cot on the veranda
outside the north-facing rooms of Vastã Khãchar’s darbãr in
Kãriyãni. He was dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, an
assembly of munis as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him.
Then Shriji Mahãrãj said, “I wish to ask a question.”

i Throughout this particular Vachanãmrut, ‘witness’ refers to God.

The Vachanãmrut

221

3

The munis responded by saying, “Mahãrãj, please do ask.”

4

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj asked, “God assumes an avatãr on
earth to grant liberation to the jivas. But is He not capable of
granting liberation while remaining in His abode, without assuming
an avatãr? After all, God can grant liberation in any manner He
wishes. What, then, is the purpose of Him assuming an avatãr on
earth? Furthermore, if God can only grant liberation when He
assumes an avatãr, and He is incapable of granting liberation
otherwise, it would suggest that much of a weakness in God. But in
reality, God is capable of granting liberation to the jivas by assuming
an avatãr, and He is also capable of granting liberation to the jivas
without assuming an avatãr. So, then, what is the purpose of God
assuming an avatãr on earth? That is the question.”

5

The senior sãdhus answered according to their own
understanding but were unable to answer Shriji Mahãrãj’s question
satisfactorily. As Shriji Mahãrãj raised doubts to their answers,
their answers were all refuted. The munis then folded their hands
and requested, “Mahãrãj, only You are capable of answering this
question.”

6

So Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “God assumes an avatãr for only
one reason: Having surrendered Himself to the bhakti of those
devotees who have intense love for Him, God assumes whichever
form the devotees wish for in order to grant them bliss. He then
fulfills all of the desires of His devotees. Since the devotees are
corporeal and have physical bodies, God also becomes corporeal,
assumes a physical body and showers affection upon those devotees.
In addition to this, He suppresses His powers and behaves with the
devotees as a son, or as an intimate companion, or as a friend, or as a
relative. Because of this, the devotee may not maintain much
protocol with God. Nonetheless, God showers His affection upon the
devotee in whichever manner he desires.

7

“Thus, the only reason God assumes an avatãr is to fulfill the
desires of His beloved devotees. Along with this, He grants liberation
to innumerable other jivas and also establishes dharma. Now if
there is any doubt in what I have just said, please speak.”

8

The munis replied, “Mahãrãj, Your reply is most appropriate.”
|| Vachanãmrut Kãriyãni-5 || 101 ||

The Vachanãmrut

222

Kãriyãni-6
One Who Possesses Matsar
1

On Ãso vadi Amãs, the day of Diwãli, Samvat 1877 [5 November
1820], a row of oil lamps had been arranged around a dais which had
been erected in front of the north-facing rooms of Vastã Khãchar’s
darbãr in Kãriyãni. There, Swãmi Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was
sitting on a decorated, canopied cot that had been placed on that dais.
He was wearing a red survãl made of kinkhãb with golden
embroidery. He was also wearing a black, kinkhãb dagli with the
words ‘Narnãrãyan-Swãminãrãyan’ imprinted upon it. Around His
head He had tied an orange pãgh with a border of golden threads. He
had also tied a sky-blue coloured feto tightly around His waist.
Moreover, garlands of yellow flowers adorned His neck. At that time,
an assembly of munis as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him.

2

A devotee from the island of Deev had come on that occasion.
She requested Shriji Mahãrãj to allow her to perform His puja.
Accepting her request, Shriji Mahãrãj came down from His ornate
seat, approached the devotee and accepted her puja. Then, after
accepting the clothes, a yellow umbrella and a pair of wooden
chãkhdis offered by her, He returned to His seat.

3

Then Shriji Mahãrãj said, “For so many years devotees have
been offering clothes and thousands of rupees worth of jewellery to
Me, but never have I gone of My own accord to receive them as I just
did. Moreover, never have I become as pleased by wearing the clothes
and jewellery offered by others as I have just now. I have become
extremely pleased upon that devotee today.”

4

The munis commented, “That devotee truly does have such
love.” In the meantime, Dinãnãth Bhatt arrived, bowed at the feet of
Shriji Mahãrãj and sat down. Subsequently, Shriji Mahãrãj gave all
of the richly embroidered clothes to him.

5

Muktãnand Swãmi then asked, “Mahãrãj, by which virtue is
God pleased upon a devotee?”

6

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “God is pleased with a devotee who
becomes free of lust, anger, avarice, deceit, egotism, jealousy and
matsar, and then offers bhakti to God. But amongst all of those,
matsar is the root of all vices. That is why in the Shrimad Bhãgwat,
Shri Vyãsji has noted that only the sãdhu who is without matsar is
The Vachanãmrut

223

worthy to possess bhãgwat dharma. Consequently, matsar is subtler
than all of the other vices. Also, it is extremely difficult to eradicate
matsar.”
7

Thereupon Brahmãnand Swãmi asked, “What is the method for
eradicating matsar?”

8

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “One who is a sãdhu, and treads the
path of a sãdhu, will be able to eradicate matsar. However, if a
person does not desire to tread the path of a sãdhu, the matsar
within him will never be eradicated.”

9

Again Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “What causes matsar?”

10

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “There are three causes of matsar:
women, wealth and sumptuous food. But for one who does not have
any of these three, egotism is the cause of matsar. Moreover, for one
who possesses matsar, the fact that I have given these clothes to
Dinãnãth Bhatt must have led to matsar. Such a person would
never think, ‘The person who brought such richly embroidered
clothes and offered them to Mahãrãj should be commended. Mahãrãj
should also be commended since He immediately gave them away to
a Brãhmin.’ Such a thought would never arise in the heart of one
who possesses matsar. Even if someone else gives something and
someone else receives it, a person who possesses matsar burns with
envy unnecessarily.

11

“As for Me, not even the slightest bit of lust, anger, avarice,
egotism, matsar or jealousy enters My heart. Also, in My heart, I
experience a strong aversion for the panchvishays, namely sights,
sounds, smells, tastes and touch. In fact, I do not have even the
slightest interest in any one of the panchvishays. Whenever I accept
food or clothes, I do so on seeing the bhakti of the devotees; never do I
accept them for My own physical pleasure. In fact, all of My actions
of eating, drinking, wearing, etc., are for the sake of all the sãdhus
and satsangis. If I feel that it is for My own sake and not for their
sake, then I would immediately discard it. Actually, the only reason
I keep this physical body is for the sake of the satsangis; besides that,
there is no other reason. Devotees such as Mulji Brahmachãri,
Somlã Khãchar and others who have been staying close to Me for so
many years, know My nature and realise, ‘Besides the devotees of
God, Mahãrãj does not have affection for anyone else. In fact,
Mahãrãj is unaffected by anything, just like ãkãsh.’ In this manner,
those who constantly stay near Me know My nature. In fact, I have
The Vachanãmrut

224

sacrificed My body for the sake of those who are devotees of God by
word, thought and deed. Therefore, in all ways, I am attached to
whosoever is a devotee of God. To Me the wealth of the 14 realms,
without the devotees of God, seems as worthless as a blade of grass.
12

“In addition, even those who are devotees of God and have
resolute love only for God, will not find pleasure in enticing vishays.
Although they may sustain the body with ordinary vishays, they
immediately become dejected by enticing vishays. So, only such a
person can be considered a completely perfect devotee of God.”
|| Vachanãmrut Kãriyãni-6 || 102 ||

Kãriyãni-7
Vairãgya Due to Obsession; Ultimate Liberation
1

On the night of Kãrtik sudi 1, Samvat 1877 [6 November 1820],
a row of oil lamps had been arranged around a dais in front of the
north-facing rooms of Vastã Khãchar’s darbãr in Kãriyãni. There,
Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting on a cot that had been placed on that dais.
He was dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, an assembly
of paramhansas as well as devotees from various places had gathered
before Him.

2

Thereupon Kãshidãs of the village of Bochãsan asked Shriji
Mahãrãj a question: “Mahãrãj, renunciants follow the path of
nivrutti; thus, they are able to keep their vrutti constantly on God.
But householders follow the path of pravrutti; hence, they are
plagued with countless worldly problems. What understanding,
then, must a householder maintain in order to fix his vrutti
constantly on God?”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “The householder should believe, ‘Just as
I had parents, wives and children during my past lives in the cycle of
8.4 million life forms3, I have the same in this life as well. In fact,
there must be many mothers, sisters and daughters from many past
lives wandering around, and yet, just as I do not have any sense of
my-ness for them, similarly, I should not keep any sense of my-ness
for the relations of this body either.’ Thinking in this manner, if he
diverts his affection from everything else, and maintains firm
affection only towards God, and keeps the company of a sãdhu, then

The Vachanãmrut

225

even a householder’s vrutti can remain constantly fixed on God, just
like the vrutti of a renunciant.”
4

Hearing these words of Shriji Mahãrãj, all of the householders
present in the assembly folded their hands and asked, “Mahãrãj,
what will become of the householder who is unable to behave in that
manner?”

5

Shriji Mahãrãj answered, “I spoke in reference to a person who,
having eradicated all desires for all objects except God, keeps his
vrutti constantly on God. But someone who is not so strong should
abide by the codes of dharma of Satsang. He should also rely on the
strength of God and the Sant, whose refuge he has taken, by
believing, ‘God is the saviour of the sinners and the uplifter of the
fallen, and I have attained Him in person.’” Hearing such words
from Shriji Mahãrãj, the devotees became extremely pleased.

6

Shriji Mahãrãj then asked the sãdhus, “What causes vairãgya to
arise?”

7

The sãdhus replied according to their understanding, but Shriji
Mahãrãj’s question could not be answered satisfactorily. So the
munis said, “Mahãrãj, You will have to answer that question.”

8

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “Upon hearing the words of the
scriptures and the satpurush, developing an obsession that does not
diminish once developed is the only cause for vairãgya; there is no
other cause. Whoever is obsessed in such a manner will develop
vairãgya, regardless of whether he is tãmasik, rãjasik or sãttvik. On
the other hand, if a person does not have such an obsession, he will
not develop vairãgya. Also, if someone’s obsession diminishes after a
few days, then the vairãgya that develops can cause tremendous
harm. How? Well, when he does have the obsession, he renounces
and leaves his home. Then, after he accepts the saffron robes, the
obsession that he had previously developed subsides; but the house he
left behind would be in ruins. Then, like the dog of a washerman
who is fed neither at home nor at the river, he falls from both paths.
On the other hand, those who have firm vairãgya attain the highest
state of enlightenment.”

9

Then Shriji Mahãrãj, in an extremely pleased mood, asked
another question to the paramhansas: “What is ultimate liberation?
Also, how does one who has attained God-realisation and ultimate
liberation feel in all of his activities?”
The Vachanãmrut

226

10

The munis answered according to their understanding, but
Shriji Mahãrãj’s question was not answered satisfactorily. So, all of
the munis folded their hands and said to Shriji Mahãrãj, “Mahãrãj,
You will have to answer that question.”

11

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “During the dissolution of the
brahmãnd, the 24 elements2, which have evolved from Prakruti, are
assimilated into Prakruti. Then Prakruti-Purush also disappear in
the divine light of Aksharbrahma, after which only the concentrated
light characterised by eternal existence, consciousness and bliss
remains. The divine form of Purushottam Bhagwãn Vãsudev is
constantly present in that divine light. Through that divine form,
He Himself becomes visible to everyone and manifests on earth in
human form for the purpose of granting liberation to the jivas. But
the jivas on earth who are ignorant fools claim that God has mãyik
gunas within Him. In reality, though, He does not have any mãyik
gunas within Him. He is forever gunãtit and has a divine form.
Moreover, it is that very same God, who has a form and is divine,
that the Vedãnta scriptures propound as being uncuttable,
unpierceable, nirgun, and pervading everywhere. It is to dispel the
mãyik view from the mind of the jiva that He has been propounded as
being nirgun. That God remains as He is during the time of
creation, sustenance and dissolution of the cosmos; i.e., He does not
undergo any changes like worldly objects do. He always maintains a
divine form. Having such a firm conviction of the manifest form of
Purushottam is called ultimate liberation.

12

“One who has attained God-realisation through such a conviction
experiences the following: Wherever he casts his eyes – among all the
mobile and immobile forms – he sees the form of God as if it is before
his eyes, the same form that constantly remains in Akshardhãm
even after the dissolution of the body, the brahmãnd and PrakrutiPurush.
Other
than
that
form, he does not perceive even an atom.
These are the
characteristics of one who has attained God-realisation.”
|| Vachanãmrut Kãriyãni-7 || 103 ||

The Vachanãmrut

227

Kãriyãni-8
The Sagun and Nirgun Forms of God
1

On Kãrtik sudi 4, Samvat 1877 [9 November 1820], Shriji
Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot on the veranda outside
the north-facing rooms of Vastã Khãchar’s darbãr in Kãriyãni. He
was dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, an assembly of
munis as well as devotees from various places had gathered before
Him.

2

Thereupon Muktãnand Swãmi asked a question: “Mahãrãj, the
Vedas, the Shãstras, the Purãns and the Itihãs scriptures have
described the sagun form of God and have also described His nirgun
form. So how should one understand the nirgun form, and how
should one understand the sagun form of Shri Purushottam? Also,
how much does a devotee of God benefit by understanding the nirgun
form of that God, and how much does he benefit by understanding
the sagun form of that God?”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “The nirgun form of God is much subtler
than that which is subtle. It is the ãtmã of all of the elements such
as pruthvi, jal, etc.; it is the ãtmã of Pradhãn-Purush, which are
higher than those elements; and it is the ãtmã of pure Purush and
Prakruti which are themselves higher than Pradhãn-Purush; it is
the ãtmã of even Akshar who is higher than them. All of these
constitute the sharir of God. Just as the jiva is subtler, purer and of
greater luminosity than the body, in the same manner, compared to
all of the other entities, God is much more subtle, pure, unaffected
and luminous.
For example, ãkãsh pervades the four bhuts –
pruthvi, jal, etc. Moreover, it remains unaffected by those four
bhuts, and the influences of those four bhuts do not affect ãkãsh. In
fact, despite dwelling in those four bhuts, ãkãsh remains absolutely
unaffected. In the same way, Purushottam Bhagwãn dwells in all as
their ãtmã. Despite this, He is absolutely unchanged and untainted,
and He maintains His own unique characteristics; no one is capable
of becoming like Him. For example, ãkãsh dwells in the four bhuts,
yet the four bhuts are incapable of becoming unaffected and
untainted like ãkãsh. Similarly, Purushottam Bhagwãn is the ãtmã
of all, yet no one up to and including Akshar is capable of becoming
as powerful as Purushottam Bhagwãn. In this manner, being
extremely subtle, extremely unaffected, extremely pure, extremely
untainted, extremely luminous, and possessing tremendous, divine
The Vachanãmrut

228

powers is the nirgun aspect of the form of that God. For example, if
Mount Girnãr were to be placed next to Mount Lokãlok it would
appear extremely small. Mount Girnãr does not become smaller in
any way, but before the extreme vastness of Lokãlok, it appears
small. In the same manner, before the vastness of Purushottam
Bhagwãn, countless millions of brahmãnds, each encircled by the
eight barriers5, appear extremely minute, like mere atoms. Those
brahmãnds do not become smaller, but before the vastness of God
they appear small. In this way, the extreme vastness of the form of
God is the sagun aspect of God.
4

“Then someone may doubt, ‘In His nirgun form, God is subtler
than the extremely subtle, and in His sagun form, He is more vast
than the extremely vast. What, then, is the nature of the original
form of God, who assumes both of these forms?’

5

“The answer to that is that the manifest form of God visible in a
human form is the eternal and original form of God. His nirgun and
sagun aspects are the special, divine powers of that form. For
example, Shri Krishna Bhagwãn and Arjun sat in a chariot and went
to retrieve the son of the Brãhmin. After crossing Mount Lokãlok,
they reached the darkness of mãyã. Shri Krishna pierced that mãyã
using his Sudarshan Chakra. Then, reaching the light of Brahma,
which transcends that mãyã, he retrieved the son of the Brãhmin
from Bhumã-Purush who resides there. In that situation, the
chariot and horses were mãyik and physical, but through contact
with Shri Krishna Bhagwãn, they became extremely subtle and like
chaitanya; thereby, they reached the nirgun Brahmadhãm of God.
In this way, to impart subtlety to physical objects is the nirgun
aspect of Shri Krishna Bhagwãn’s form.

6

“Furthermore, that same Shri Krishna Bhagwãn showed the
whole brahmãnd, including the eight barriers5 which encircle it, in
his own mouth to his mother, Yashodãji. To Arjun, he also revealed
the Vishwarup form in his own form. At that time, with the
exception of Arjun, others saw the form of God as being three-and-ahalf arms in height. Moreover, when God assumed the avatãr of
Vãman, he initially gave darshan in the form of a dwarf. After he
made Bali relinquish as much land as could be covered in three
footsteps, he increased the size of his own form to such an extent that
one footstep alone covered the seven pãtãls, with his own body
covering the entire sky. With his second footstep, he covered the
The Vachanãmrut

229

seven swargs and pierced the outer shell of the brahmãnd. King Bali
saw this vast form of God, but others only saw the dwarf form
assumed by God – exactly as it was visible. In this way, God’s
vastness, which is even more vast than the extremely vast, is the
sagun aspect of God’s form. For example, the sky is cloudless during
winter and summer, but when monsoon arrives, it becomes overcast
with innumerable clusters of clouds. With time, these clouds form in
the sky and later disperse again. In the same way, by His own will,
God reveals His divine powers from Himself in their nirgun and
sagun aspects and also withdraws them back within Himself. That
God appears to be like a human, but no one is able to fathom the
limits of His greatness. If a devotee realises the nirgun and sagun
aspects in God’s form in this manner, then kãl, karma and mãyã
would be incapable of binding him, and throughout the day he would
continuously experience wonder in his heart.”
|| Vachanãmrut Kãriyãni-8 || 104 ||

Kãriyãni-9
Obstinacy like a Buffalo
1

On Kãrtik sudi 5, Samvat 1877 [10 November 1820], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot on
the veranda outside the north-facing rooms of Vastã Khãchar’s
darbãr in Kãriyãni. He was dressed entirely in white clothes. At
that time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees from various
places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj asked a question to Nityãnand Swãmi
and Brahmãnand Swãmi: “Suppose there is someone who has such a
spiteful obstinacy that once he develops a grudge for someone, he
never forsakes that grudge; instead, he continues to be obstinate like
a buffalo. Can such a person be called a sãdhu or not?”

3

Both replied, “One who is like that cannot be called a sãdhu.”

4

Then Muktãnand Swãmi asked a question: “Mahãrãj, it may be
the case that a devotee of God finds a fault in some other devotee, and
due to that, he develops spite for that devotee. How can one eradicate
the perception of that flaw?”

5

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “A person who possesses the bhakti of
God in his heart and realises the greatness of God would never find a
The Vachanãmrut

230

fault in a devotee of God, and he would never develop a spiteful
obstinacy towards a devotee of God. For example, Uddhavji had
understood the greatness of God, and therefore asked for a boon: ‘May
I be reborn as any of the vines, blades of grass or shrubs in
Vrundãvan in order to have the privilege of being touched by the dust
of the feet of these gopis.’ Also, Shri Krishna Bhagwãn told Baldevji
that the trees, birds and deer in Vrundãvan are extremely fortunate.
Even Brahmã asked for a boon from Shri Krishna Bhagwãn: ‘O God!
May I be so highly blessed to be able to serve your holy feet in the
midst of your servants, either in this life, or in the life of an animal
or bird.’
6

“Therefore, one who understands the greatness of a devotee of
God in this way will never develop a grudge due to a person’s flaws.
Moreover, one who understands such greatness never takes into
account even minor drawbacks that are present in a devotee of the
manifest form of one’s own Ishtadev. In fact, one who realises the
greatness of God looks upon even animals, trees, shrubs, etc., which
have come into contact with God as equivalent to deities. If that is
so, what can be said of those people who are engaged in the bhakti of
God, abiding by religious vows, and chanting the name of God? He
would certainly look upon them as equivalent to deities and would not
think ill of them.

7

“Therefore, one who understands the greatness of God does not
develop animosity towards devotees of God. On the other hand, one
who does not understand such greatness does develop animosity
towards them. Therefore, one who does not realise the greatness of
God and God’s devotees should be known as being half-fallen, even if
he is a satsangi. Moreover, only one who understands the greatness
of God and the devotees of God should be known to be a perfect
satsangi.”
|| Vachanãmrut Kãriyãni-9 || 105 ||

Kãriyãni-10
Checking the Pulse; Austerities
1

On the night of Kãrtik sudi 10, Samvat 1877 [15 November
1820], Swãmi Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting in one of the
east-facing rooms of Vastã Khãchar’s darbãr in Kãriyãni. At that
time, ten or twelve senior sãdhus and five or six devotees were sitting
The Vachanãmrut

231

before Him. Shriji Mahãrãj seemed to have a fever, and so He was
warming Himself in front of a charcoal stove that had been placed
before Him.
2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj told Muktãnand Swãmi, “Please
check My pulse. It seems as if there is a slight illness in My body.”

3

Then, after checking His pulse, Muktãnand Swãmi said,
“Mahãrãj! It seems to be a serious illness.” Saying this, he
continued, “Mahãrãj, it seems that the times are tough for the
satsangis right now; after all, Mahãrãj! You are as vital to the
satsangis as their lives, and any illness in Your body is the very
definition of a difficult period for all satsangis.”

4

Hearing this, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “In order to please God,
Nãradji performed stringent austerities by enduring cold and heat,
hunger and thirst for many yugs; and due to this, he was able to
please God. In the same way, a person who is wise deliberately
performs austerities by restraining his body and indriyas. Thus, a
sãdhu who is wise should also behave so as to deliberately induce
suffering to his body and indriyas. If that is so, why should he wish
to relieve whatever suffering comes his way due to God’s wish?

5

“Moreover, a renunciant sãdhu should firmly maintain the
following wish in his mind: ‘I do not desire the pleasures of the
panchvishays found in Devlok, Brahmalok, Vaikunth and other
realms. In this very body, or by going to Badrikãshram and
Shwetdwip after I die, I wish to please God by performing austerities.
Furthermore, even if it takes one life or two lives or a thousand lives,
I wish to please God only by performing austerities.’

6

“Furthermore, the jiva’s liberation is attained only by the
following understanding: ‘Everything happens by the will of the
incarnate form of Shri Krishna Nãrãyan, not by kãl, karma, mãyã,
etc.’ In this manner, understanding only God to be the all-doer is the
supreme cause of liberation. Performing austerities, however, earns
God’s pleasure. Yet even while performing austerities, one should
keep such feelings as Rãdhikãji and Lakshmiji keep for God when
offering profound, loving bhakti. Still, if a person understands only
God to be the all-doer, then even if he does not perform austerities,
his jiva overcomes the misery of births and deaths. But without
performing austerities, God’s pleasure is not bestowed upon that jiva.

The Vachanãmrut

232

7

“There is no sinner worse than the person who does not realise
God to be the all-doer. In fact, he should be known to be a sinner
worse than one who has killed a cow, killed a Brãhmin, associated
with the wife of one’s own guru or maligned a true guru who is a
knower of Brahma. Why? Because he believes kãl, karma, etc., to be
the cause of everything, not God. In fact, one should not even stand
in the shadow of such persons who are nãstik outcasts, nor should
one listen to their talks, even unknowingly.

8

“Furthermore, by the grace of God, those who are devotees of
God may become like Brahmã, Shiv, Shukji or Nãrad; they may even
become like Prakruti-Purush; or they may become like Brahma or
Akshar.
However, no one is capable of becoming like Shri
Purushottam Nãrãyan. Therefore, just as one shuns a vile person,
one should immediately shun the company of those persons and those
scriptures that refute the upãsanã of God and break one’s masterservant relationship with God.”

9

Then Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, a devotee who serves
God by offering beautiful clothes, jewellery, various types of food, etc.,
also desires to please God. Yet, you are saying that one can only
please God through austerities. What, then, is inappropriate about
pleasing God through such offerings, without resorting to
austerities?”

10

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “If the person who is offering bhakti to
God with such lavish objects does so without any desires, solely for
the purpose of earning God’s pleasure, then it is all right. If, on the
other hand, he is tempted by those objects, viewing them to be God’s
prasãd, and, leaving God aside, if he develops affection for those
objects, then by indulging in the vishays, he will become engrossed in
them and corrupted by them – that is what is inappropriate.
Therefore, a renunciant should realise God to be the all-doer and
strive to please God only by performing austerities. He should also
worship God by offering profound, loving bhakti in the manner of
Rãdhikãji and Lakshmiji. That is My principle.”

11

Thereafter, Brahmãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, please tell us
how we can benefit in this realm and in the realm we attain after
death?”

12

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “The principle that I have just explained
is itself the only means to attain supreme bliss, in this realm and in
other realms.”
The Vachanãmrut

233

13

Then Gopãlãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, in one’s mind one
may have great zeal to cultivate the virtue of renunciation and
perform austerities. But if some obstacle is encountered in the
process, what should one do?”

14

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “A person who has great zeal in any
endeavour would never be hindered, even if he were to face thousands
of obstacles. That should be known to be true zeal. Just see, it has
been 21 years since I first met Rãmãnand Swãmi. During this
period, I have come across countless devotees who have been offering
a countless variety of clothes, jewellery, food and drink, etc. Despite
this, My mind has never been tempted by any of those objects. Why?
Because I have zeal only for renunciation.

15

“Furthermore, in this world there are so many widows who,
following the death of their husbands, continue to lament bitterly; on
the other hand, there are also many women who renounce their
wedded husbands and engage themselves in worshipping God.
Similarly, there are so many foolish men who mourn the loss of their
own wives and continue hankering after other women; on the other
hand, there are so many men with vairãgya, who renounce their own
wedded wives and engage themselves in worshipping God. In this
manner, each and every person has a different type of zeal.

16

“But My zeal and principle is just this: One should strive to
please God by performing austerities. And realising God to be the alldoer, one should offer bhakti to Him while maintaining a masterservant relationship. Also, one should not allow the upãsanã of that
God to be violated in any way. All of you should accept these words of
Mine as the most supreme principle.”
|| Vachanãmrut Kãriyãni-10 || 106 ||

Kãriyãni-11
The Characteristic of Affection
1

On the night of Kãrtik sudi 11, Samvat 1877 [16 November
1820], Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting on the veranda outside the eastfacing rooms of Vastã Khãchar’s darbãr in Kãriyãni. He was
wearing a white khes and a white dagli made of chhint. He had also
tied a white pãgh around His head and was wearing garlands of
yellow and red guldãvadi flowers. Tassels of yellow flowers were also
The Vachanãmrut

234

dangling from His pãgh. In addition to this, two barbers holding
torches were standing before Him, one on either side. At that time,
an assembly of munis as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him.
2

Thereupon Sachchidãnand Swãmi asked Shriji Mahãrãj, “What
are the characteristics of a person who has affection for God?”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “He who has affection for his beloved,
God, will never disobey the wishes of his beloved. That is the
characteristic of affection. To take an example, the gopis had
affection for Shri Krishna Bhagwãn.
So, when Shri Krishna
Bhagwãn prepared to leave for Mathurã, all of them together decided,
‘We will infringe the norms of family traditions and society, and we
will keep God here by force.’ However, at the time of Shri Krishna
Bhagwãn’s departure, they looked into his eyes and realised that it
was not his wish to stay. As a result, all of them remained far away,
because in their hearts, they feared, ‘If we do not act according to
God’s liking, God’s affection for us will subside.’ Thinking in this
way, none of them were able to utter a word.

4

“Then, after God went to Mathurã, even though Shri Krishna
was only three gãus away, the gopis never disobeyed his wishes by
going for his darshan. They realised, ‘If we do go to Mathurã
contrary to God’s wish, then the affection that God has for us will
diminish.’

5

“Therefore, the characteristic of affection is exactly this: One
who has true affection for a person acts according to the person’s
wishes. If he realises his beloved to be pleased by his staying nearby,
then he stays nearby. On the other hand, if he realises his beloved to
be pleased by his staying away, then he stays away; but in no way
does he behave contrary to his beloved’s wish.
That is the
characteristic of affection. So, since the gopis had true affection for
God, they did not go for God’s darshan without his command. Only
when God sent for them in Kurukshetra did they have the darshan of
God, but in no way did they disobey God’s command. Therefore, a
person who has affection for God would never disobey God’s
command. He would only act according to God’s wishes. That is the
characteristic of affection.”

6

Then Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Now let Me ask a question.”

7

The munis responded, “Mahãrãj, please do ask.”
The Vachanãmrut

235

8

Shriji Mahãrãj then said, “Except for those vishays which are
related to God, a devotee of God treats all other vishays as vain.
Thus, he associates in the five waysi only with God. Now, suppose
God were to issue the following command to such a devotee: ‘Live
away from Me.’ In that situation, if he keeps a selfish desire for
God’s darshan, it would amount to disobeying the command; and if
he does not follow the command, then the love that God harbours
towards that devotee would not remain. Therefore, just as that
devotee has forsaken the worldly vishays, i.e., sights, sounds, smells,
tastes and touch, does he also forsake the vishays related to God, or
does he not? That is the question.”

9

Each of the munis gave an answer according to his level of
intelligence, but the question was not answered satisfactorily. They
then said to Shriji Mahãrãj, “Mahãrãj, You will have to provide the
answer.”

10

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “If a devotee has deep
affection for God and treats the worldly panchvishays that are not
related to God as vain, and if he is firmly attached to God via the
panchvishays, then wherever such a devotee goes by God’s command,
the form of God also goes with him. Moreover, just as that devotee
cannot remain without God, in exactly the same way, God also
cannot remain without that devotee. In fact, He does not leave the
heart of that devotee even for a fraction of a second. Therefore, such
a devotee does, in fact, constantly maintain contact with God in the
five ways. How? Because the same panchvishays that no being can
stay without, that devotee has considered to be vain; instead, he has
attached himself to God in the five ways. Therefore, that devotee
maintains a constant relationship with God.”
|| Vachanãmrut Kãriyãni-11 || 107 ||

i

Here, the ‘five ways’ of associating with God refers to associating with God
through the five vishays, i.e. sights, sounds, smells, tastes and touch of God.

The Vachanãmrut

236

Kãriyãni-12
Destroying the Kãran Body; A Tamarind Seed
1

On Kãrtik sudi Punam, Samvat 1877 [20 November 1820],
Swãmi Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated
cot on the veranda outside the east-facing rooms of Vastã Khãchar’s
darbãr in Kãriyãni. He was wearing a white khes and a white dagli
made of chhint. He had also tied a white feto with a bokãni around
His head. At that time, an assembly of paramhansas as well as
devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Please initiate a questionanswer session.”

3

Thereafter, the munis asked questions amongst themselves for
quite some time, wherein the topic of the three bodies of the jiva –
sthul, sukshma and kãran; and the three bodies of ishwar – virãt,
sutrãtmã and avyãkrut, arose.

4

Shriji Mahãrãj then commented, “The kãran body is the mãyã of
the jiva. That same kãran body evolves into the sthul and sukshma
bodies. Thus, all three – the sthul, sukshma and kãran bodies – can
be said to be the mãyã of the jiva. In the same manner, virãt,
sutrãtmã and avyãkrut can be said to be the mãyã of ishwar.

5

“This mãyã of the jiva, i.e., the kãran body, is attached so
strongly to the jiva that they cannot be separated by any means
whatsoever. However, if a person attains the company of the Sant,
realises the form of God through the words of that Sant, meditates on
that form of God and imbibes the words of God in his heart, then the
kãran body attached to his jiva is burnt completely.

6

“For example, the skin of a tamarind seed is extremely firmly
attached to the seed. But when the seed is roasted over a fire, the
skin is burnt and becomes detached. It can then be peeled off easily
by rubbing the seed in one’s hands. Similarly, when the kãran body
is ‘roasted’ by the meditation and words of God, it becomes separated
from the jiva just as easily as one rubs off the skin of a roasted
tamarind seed. However, even if one were to try a million other
methods, one could not destroy the jiva’s ignorance in the form of the
kãran body.”

7

Thereafter, Shriji Mahãrãj asked a question to the munis:
“During the waking state, sattvagun prevails and one has knowledge
The Vachanãmrut

237

of all objects. However, despite having heard something in the state
of wakefulness, only when one contemplates on it in the sukshma
body does whatever one has heard become consolidated. But rajogun
prevails in the sukshma body, and during the state of rajogun,
complete knowledge is not possible. Yet, in the sukshma body, when
one contemplates on what one has heard during the waking state, it
becomes complete knowledge. How can this apparent contradiction
be resolved?”
8

The munis collectively attempted to explain to the best of their
understanding, but none could provide a satisfactory answer to Shriji
Mahãrãj’s question.
Thus, they folded their hands and said,
“Mahãrãj, this question can only be answered by You.”

9

Shriji Mahãrãj thereupon explained, “The answer is that the
jiva, which is the kshetragna, dwells within the heart.
The
kshetragna enlightens the 14 indriyas; of these, the antahkaran
dwells extremely close to the kshetragna. As a result, whatever one
hears is consolidated when one contemplates on it in the antahkaran.
After all, the kshetragna is more powerful than all of the indriyas
and the antahkaran, and so whatever it endorses becomes thoroughly
consolidated.”

10

Having heard this answer, the munis remarked, “Mahãrãj, You
have given a precise answer. No one besides You could have
answered that question.”

11

Thereafter, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Regardless of how lustful,
angry, greedy or lewd a person may be, if he listens to these types of
discourses with faith and love, all of his flaws would be eradicated.
For example, if a man with teeth strong enough to chew raw chanã
were to eat a great many sour mangoes, then he would not be able to
chew even boiled rice. In the same way, if a person who is strongly
overpowered by lust, anger, etc., were to listen to these discourses
with faith and persistence, then that person would no longer be
capable of indulging in the panchvishays. Moreover, the mind does
not become as free of desires for vishays by subjecting the body to
austere observances such as tapta-kruchchhra, chãndrãyan or other
vows as it does by listening to these discourses of God. In addition,
your minds must not be becoming as stable while meditating or by
turning the rosary as perfectly as they do while you are listening to
these discourses. Thus, one should listen to the discourses of
The Vachanãmrut

238

Purushottam Nãrãyan with faith and love. There is no better
method to stabilise the mind and to free it of the desires for vishays.”
|| Vachanãmrut Kãriyãni-12 || 108 ||

|| End of Kãriyãni Section ||

LOYÃ SECTION
Loyã-1
Anger; Developing Complete Satsang
1

On Kãrtik vadi 10, Samvat 1877 [30 November 1820], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot in
the residential hall of the paramhansas in Surã Khãchar’s darbãr in
Loyã. He was wearing a white, cotton-padded survãl and a white
dagli made of chhint. He had also tied a white feto around His head.
At that time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees from various
places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj asked the munis, “What does the
word ‘Shankar’ mean?”

3
4

The munis replied, “That which gives bliss is called ‘Shankar.’”
Hearing this answer, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Last night, an hour
or two before sunrise, Shivji granted Me his darshan in a dream. He
was seated on the big, powerful Nandishwar. His body was very
robust, and he had thickly matted hair; he appeared to be
approximately 40 years of age. Along with Shivji was Pãrvati, who
was wearing white clothes. Shivji, like a great sãdhu, appeared
tranquil. Even though he showed great affection towards Me, I did
not feel affection for him. Why? Because I believe, ‘Shiv is a deity
full of tamogun, whereas I worship Shri Krishna Nãrãyan, who is
tranquillity personified.’ Therefore, I do not have much affection for
deities like Brahmã, Shiv, Indra, etc., who have rajogun and
tamogun. Moreover, I have much animosity towards anger; I do not
like angry men or angry deities. Nonetheless, why do I respect
Shivji? I do so because he is a renunciant, a yogi and a great devotee
of God.”
The Vachanãmrut

239

5

“What is anger like? Well, it is like a rabid dog. If the saliva of
a rabid dog touches a man or a cow, then they, like the incessantly
barking rabid dog, suffer and die. Similarly, one infected by ‘saliva’
in the form of anger, like the rabid dog, suffers and falls from the
path of a sãdhu.

6

“Furthermore, just like a butcher, an Arab, a cruel soldier, a
tiger, a leopard and a black snake frighten everyone and kill some,
similarly, anger frightens all and takes the life of some others. If
such anger arises in a sãdhu, it appears very unsuitable; after all, a
sãdhu should be calm. But if anger were to arise, that sãdhu would
appear cruel to others. At that time, that sãdhu’s appearance would
change since anger itself is ugly. Hence, anger makes the person in
whom it arises appear ugly.”

7

Then Shuk Muni asked, “Mahãrãj, if a slight trace of anger
arises but is then suppressed, is such anger obstructive, or not?”

8

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “If a snake were to appear in this
assembly at this moment, then even if it does not bite anyone,
everyone would still have to rise and scatter; there would be panic in
everyone’s heart. Furthermore, if a tiger were to come and roar at
the outskirts of a village, then even if it does not harm anyone, all
would feel terror within, and no one would come out of their homes.
Similarly, even if a trace of anger were to arise, it would still be a
source of extreme misery.”

9

Then Nãnã Nirmãnãnand Swãmi asked, “By what means can
lust be totally uprooted?”

10

To this, Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “If one has extremely firmly
realised oneself to be the ãtmã; and one firmly observes the five
religious vows4, including the observance of the vow of eight-fold
brahmacharya; and one thoroughly understands the greatness of
God, then lust is uprooted by these means. However, even after the
roots of lust have been eradicated, one should not deviate from
brahmacharya and other niyams in any way. However, the method
for totally uprooting even the most vicious form of lust is to fully
understand the greatness of God.”

11

Thereafter, Bhajanãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, what are the
characteristics of the three levels of vairãgya – the lowest, the
intermediate and the highest?”

The Vachanãmrut

240

12

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “A person with the lowest level of
vairãgya remains pure while strictly observing the niyams related to
the renunciation of women as described in the Dharma-shãstras.
But if he were to see a woman’s body, then his mind would get
attached to that body, and he would not remain stable. Such a
person can be considered to be one with the lowest level of vairãgya.”

13

“If a person with an intermediate level of vairãgya were to see a
naked woman, then just as he would not be disturbed by seeing
naked animals, similarly, no disturbance would arise in his mind.
Moreover, his mind would not become attached to that woman. Such
a person can be considered to be one with an intermediate level of
vairãgya.”

14

“Now, if a person with the highest level of vairãgya were to come
across women and other worldly objects even in solitude, he would
not be enticed. Such a person can be considered to be one with the
highest level of vairãgya.”

15

Then Bhajanãnand Swãmi asked again, “What are the
characteristics of the three levels of God’s gnãn – the lowest, the
intermediate and the highest?”

16

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “A person with the lowest level of gnãn
initially develops the conviction of God upon seeing His powers. But
when such powers are not seen in Him, or when nothing untoward
happens to an evil person who maligns God, then his conviction
would not remain. Such a person can be described as one with the
lowest level of gnãn.”

17

“If a person with an intermediate level of gnãn were to see pure
and impure – seemingly human – actions of God, he would be deluded
by them, and his conviction of God would not remain. Such a person
can be described as one with an intermediate level of gnãn.”

18

“A person with the highest level of gnãn, however, would not be
deluded even after seeing any type of pure or impure actions
performed by God, and his conviction would not diminish. Moreover,
even if the person who initially convinced him of God were to say, ‘He
is not God,’ he would feel, ‘This person must be mad.’ Such a person
can be described as one with the highest level of gnãn.”

19

“Of these, the one with the lowest level of gnãn attains Godrealisation after countless lives; the one with a moderate level of gnãn
attains God-realisation after two or three lives; and the one with the
The Vachanãmrut

241

highest level of gnãn attains God-realisation in that same life.” Shriji
Mahãrãj replied in this manner.
20

Thereafter, Motã Shivãnand Swãmi asked, “Despite having
complete faith in God, why does one not feel fulfilled within?”

21

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “A person whose antahkaran burns due
to the enemies of lust, anger, avarice, affection, egotism, cravings for
taste, etc., would not believe himself to be fulfilled – even if he does
have faith in God.”

22

Then Nityãnand Swãmi asked, “What is the method for
overcoming the enemies of lust, anger, etc.?”

23

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “Lust and those other enemies are
overcome only if one remains alert to mercilessly punish them. Just
as Dharmarãjã remains ready, day and night, to beat sinners with a
stick, similarly, if the indriyas behave immorally, then the indriyas
should be punished; and if the antahkaran behaves immorally, then
the antahkaran should be punished.
The indriyas should be
punished by imposing upon them the kruchchhra chãndrãyan and
other observances, and the antahkaran should be punished through a
thought process. As a result, those enemies of lust, anger, etc.,
would be defeated. Then, by having faith in God, one would feel
oneself to be completely fulfilled.”

24

Thereafter, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Who can be said to have
developed complete satsang?”

25

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “First of all, such a person has extremely
firmly realised his self to be the ãtmã. Also, he believes his ãtmã to
be absolutely detached from the body, the indriyas and the
antahkaran; he does not believe the actions of the body, indriyas, etc.,
to be his own. Despite this, he does not permit even a slight lapse in
the observance of the five religious vows4. Moreover, even though he
himself behaves as brahmarup, he does not abandon his feeling of
servitude towards Purushottam Bhagwãn; he staunchly worships
God while maintaining a master-servant relationship with Him.
Furthermore, he realises the manifest form of God to be absolutely
unaffected, like ãkãsh. That ãkãsh is interwoven with and pervades
the other four bhuts, the actions of which occur within ãkãsh.
However, the actions of those four bhuts do not affect ãkãsh.
Similarly, despite performing pure and impure actions, the manifest
form of Shri Krishna Nãrãyan remains unaffected, just like ãkãsh.
The Vachanãmrut

242

Also, such a person realises the countless powers of this God as
follows: ‘This God appears to be human for the liberation of the jivas.
But, in fact, He is the creator, sustainer and destroyer of countless
brahmãnds.
He is the lord of Golok, Vaikunth, Shwetdwip,
Brahmapur and other abodes. He is also the lord of all of the
countless aksharrup muktas.’
With such realisation of God’s
greatness, he devoutly engages in listening to the talks of God and in
the other forms of bhakti. He also serves God’s devotees menially.
When a person behaves in this manner, his satsang can be said to be
complete.”
26

Nãnã Shivãnand Swãmi then asked, “At times, one understands
the greatness of a devotee of God extremely well, but at other times,
one does not understand it so well. What is the reason for this?”

27

Then Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “The Sant follows the path of
dharma. When he sees a person treading the path of adharma, he
rebukes that person. As a result, a person who identifies his self
with the body will not know how to accept the advice positively and,
in return, will harbour an aversion towards the Sant. Therefore, a
person understands the greatness of the Sant as long as he is not
rebuked by him. Even when that person is given beneficial advice
that may pain him, he harbours an aversion and does not retain that
understanding of the Sant’s greatness.

28

“One who harbours an aversion towards the Sant is unable to
become pure by any form of atonement. In fact, release from the sins
of lust and other vices is possible, but release from the sin of
maligning the Sant is not possible. For example, if a person
contracts tuberculosis, no medicine would be able to cure the disease;
he would definitely die. Similarly, one who harbours an aversion
towards the Sant should be known as having tuberculosis; he will
certainly fall from Satsang sometime in the future. Furthermore,
even if a person’s hands, feet, nose, eyes, fingers and other body parts
are severed, he still cannot be described as dead. However, when the
head is severed from the body, he is described as dead. Similarly, he
who perceives flaws in a devotee of God has had his head severed. If
he lapses in following other religious vows, then his limbs can be said
to be severed – he will still live. That is, he will survive in Satsang.
But a person who has perceived flaws in the Sant will certainly, at
some time, fall from Satsang. He should be known to have his head
severed.”
The Vachanãmrut

243

29

Then Bhagwadãnand Swãmi asked, “If one has perceived flaws
in a devotee, is there any method to atone for it, or not?”

30

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “There is a remedy, but it is extremely
difficult; one who has intense shraddhã can do it. When flaws are
perceived in the Sant, one should think, ‘I have committed a grave
sin by perceiving flaws in a brahmaswarup Bhakta of God.’ From
such thoughts, he would feel intense regret in his heart. As a result
of such regret, while eating, he would be unable to distinguish
between tasty and tasteless foods, and at night he would be unable to
sleep. As long as the aversion towards the Sant is not removed from
the person’s heart, he would experience extreme remorse, just like a
fish would suffer without water.

31

“On the other hand, when he intensely perceives virtues in that
Sant, then if that Sant has been hurt in any way, he would please
him with absolute humility. If this type of thought remains in a
person’s heart, then even if he has perceived flaws in the Sant, they
would still be overcome, and he would not fall from Satsang. Apart
from that, there is no other remedy; that is the only remedy.”
|| Vachanãmrut Loyã-1 || 109 ||

Loyã-2
One with Faith, Gnãn, Courage or Affection
1

On Kãrtik vadi 11, Samvat 1877 [1 December 1820], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting facing south on a large,
decorated cot in Surã Khãchar’s darbãr in Loyã. He was wearing a
red, kinkhãb survãl and a black, kinkhãb dagli with the word
‘Narnãrãyan’ imprinted upon it. Around His head, He had tied a
Burãnpuri, sky-blue coloured feto with golden threads along the
edges. He had also tied an orange-coloured feto around His waist. At
that time, Muktãnand Swãmi and other paramhansas were singing
devotional songs to the accompaniment of a dukad, sarodã, satãr and
manjirãs, while munis as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him in an assembly.

2

After the singing had concluded, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “O
paramhansas, please listen. I wish to ask you a question.”

3

The munis said, “Mahãrãj, please ask.”
The Vachanãmrut

244

4

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj asked, “In this Satsang, when does a
devotee become free from the fear of death and become convinced of
his own liberation in this very life?”

5

Muktãnand Swãmi replied as well as he could, but Shriji
Mahãrãj’s question was not answered satisfactorily. So the other
paramhansas requested, “Mahãrãj, You will have to answer that
question.”

6

Shriji Mahãrãj then began, “While you were singing devotional
songs, I thought about this. In My mind, I feel that there are four
types of devotees of God who no longer fear death and who feel
completely fulfilled. These four types are: first, one who has faith;
second, one with gnãn; third, one with courage; and fourth, one with
affection. These four types of devotees do not fear death, and they feel
fulfilled while still alive.

7

“Now, I shall describe the characteristics of these four types of
devotees. One who has faith has established absolute faith in the
words of God and His Sant. Therefore, by the strength of his faith in
God, he does not harbour any fear of death. Also, he believes, ‘I have
attained the manifest form of Purushottam Bhagwãn, and thus I am
fulfilled.’

8

“A devotee with gnãn has the strength of ãtmã-realisation and
believes, ‘I am brahmaswarup and a devotee of God.’ Therefore, he
too does not fear death.

9

“All of the indriyas and antahkaran tremble with fear before a
devotee who has courage. Also, he is not afraid of anyone. So, he
does not transgress any of God’s injunctions in any way. As a result,
he believes himself to be fulfilled and does not have even the slightest
fear of death.

10

“The fourth, who has affection, has the inclination of a faithful
wife. The vrutti of a faithful wife is not drawn to anyone except her
own husband, and she has affection only for her husband. Similarly,
this devotee of God, like the faithful wife, has affection only for his
master, God. As a result, he believes himself to be fulfilled and does
not have even the slightest fear of death.

11

“Out of these four types of inclinations, if only one is
predominant and the other three are subordinate, one still overcomes
the fear of births and deaths. But if a person does not have any one
of the four, then his fear of death is not overcome.”
The Vachanãmrut

245

12

Having said this, Shriji Mahãrãj asked all of the paramhansas
and other devotees, “Of these four, please declare which inclination is
predominant within you.” So, all of the paramhansas described
whichever inclination was predominant within them, and the other
devotees did likewise. Hearing this, Shriji Mahãrãj was very pleased.

13

Then Shriji Mahãrãj continued, “Of these four types, all those
who have the inclination of courage may come near and bow down at
My feet.” So, those who had the inclination of courage placed Shriji
Mahãrãj’s holy feet on their chests and bowed down before Him.

14

Thereafter, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Those who wish to ask a
question, please ask.”

15

Thereupon Brahmãnand Swãmi asked, “That which is the cause
should be greater than its effect. Why, then, does a large tree arise
from the seed of a banyan tree, which is small?”

16

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “A cause may be small and subtle, yet it
is still capable of producing a vast effect – that is the very greatness
of the cause. For example, the entities evolved from Mul-Prakruti,
the countless Pradhãns, occupy a great expanse, whereas the cause,
Mul-Prakruti, has the form of a female. Also, smell, which is the
cause of pruthvi, is subtle, whereas the entity evolved from it,
pruthvi, is large. Similarly, ãkãsh and the other four bhuts occupy a
vast area, but their causes, sound, touch, etc., are subtle. Hence, the
cause may be small, but it still has the ability to produce a vast
effect – such is its capability.

17

“Agnidev, for example, possesses a form like that of a man; and
his size is like that of a man; but his effect – in the form of flames of
fire – is large. Similarly, the form of Varun is the size of a man, but
his effect – in the form of water – is very abundant. Further, the
form of Surya is seated in a chariot like a man, but his effect – in the
form of light – pervades the entire brahmãnd. In the same manner,
the cause of all, Shri Purushottam Nãrãyan – Shri Krishna – is the
size of a man, yet He is the cause of countless millions of brahmãnds.
But one who is a fool thinks, ‘If the effect is this big, then the cause
must be so much bigger!’ Actually, this is the understanding of a
fool. God, who is the cause of all, appears like a human being; yet by
His yogic powers, He is able to create countless millions of
brahmãnds from His body and is able to absorb them back into
Himself. For example, Agni, Varun and Surya appear vast in the
form of their effects, but they withdraw their effect back within
The Vachanãmrut

246

themselves, and only they remain. In the same way, within each
and every hair of God, countless brahmãnds, each composed of the
eight barriers5 and 14 realms, appear as mere atoms. In this way,
the cause is transcendental and full of greatness. So, one who is wise
realises, ‘God appears like a human, but, in fact, He is the cause of
all and the creator of all; He is all-powerful.’”
18

Having said this, Shriji Mahãrãj returned to go to sleep.
|| Vachanãmrut Loyã-2 || 110 ||

Loyã-3
One with Faith in God Coupled with
the Knowledge of His Greatness
1

On the night of Kãrtik vadi 13, Samvat 1877 [3 December 1820],
Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot in Surã
Khãchar’s darbãr in Loyã. He was wearing a white dagli made of
chhint and a white, cotton-padded survãl. He had also tied a white
feto around His head and had covered Himself with a white blanket.
At that time, an assembly of munis as well as satsangis from various
places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Bhagwadãnand Swãmi and Shivãnand Swãmi asked
Shriji Mahãrãj, “What are the characteristics of a person who has
faith in God and His Sant coupled with the knowledge of their
greatness?”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “What would a person who has faith in
God and His Sant coupled with the knowledge of their greatness not
do for the sake of God and His Sant? For them, he would renounce
his family, renounce any fear of public ridicule, renounce a kingdom,
renounce pleasures, renounce wealth, renounce his wife, and in the
case of a woman, she would renounce her husband.”

4

Then Shriji Mahãrãj narrated the stories of the following
devotees: Rajput Galuji of the village Dadusar; Kushalkuvarbãi of
Dharmapur; Parvatbhãi; Rãjbãi; Jivubãi; Lãdubãi; Motã Rãmbãi;
Dãdã Khãchar; Mãnchã Bhakta; Mulji Brahmachãri; Lãdhibãi and
Mãtãji of Bhuj; Muktãnand Swãmi; Sãmat Patel, an Ãhir from the
Vãlãk region; Mulji and Krishnaji of the village Mãnkuvã; the two
Kãthi devotees of the village Gundãli in the Vãlãk region; and other
The Vachanãmrut

247

satsangis. Mahãrãj described in detail whatever they had done for
the sake of God and His Sant.
5

Then He added, “One who has faith in God coupled with
knowledge of His greatness never disobeys the words of God; he does
as God says.” Having said this, He revealed, “What was My nature
like? Well, I was such a renunciant that I could stay in one place
only as long as the time interval between the morning and evening
milking of cows, not any longer. I had intense vairãgya. Moreover, I
had deep affection for Rãmãnand Swãmi. Thus, when Swãmi sent a
message from the city of Bhuj via Mayãrãm Bhatt, saying, ‘If You
desire to stay in the Satsang fellowship, You will have to stay by
embracing its pillar,’ I literally embraced a pillar. Seeing this,
Mayãrãm Bhatt said, ‘You should live according to Muktãnand
Swãmi’s commands.’ Thus, before I had the darshan of Rãmãnand
Swãmi, I stayed under Muktãnand Swãmi for nine months. So, one
who has the previously mentioned faith in God and His Sant can also
be known by this characteristic.” Shriji Mahãrãj then narrated the
stories of Sundarji Suthãr and Dosã Vãniyã.

6

After mentioning that one who has such faith in God and His
Sant has constant enthusiasm, Shriji Mahãrãj narrated the story of
Rãnã Rãjgar.

7

Next, Shriji Mahãrãj narrated the story of Prahlãd: “Prahlãd
said to Nrusinhji, ‘Mahãrãj, I am not afraid of this terrifying form of
yours. Moreover, I do not consider your protection of me as true
protection. Rather, when you save me from my enemy’s troops in the
form of the of the indriyas, I shall consider that to be true protection.’
Therefore, a devotee of God would not be elated if God were to protect
him physically; and he would not be disappointed if he were not
protected. Instead, he would remain carefree and continue to worship
God.

8

“Moreover, he would intensely realise the greatness of God and
His Sant.” Then Shriji Mahãrãj narrated the story of the old lady
from the village Kathlãl.

9

Continuing, He said, “Even if such a devotee were to die
painfully, or if a tiger were to devour him, or if a snake were to bite
him, or if a weapon were to strike him, or if he were to drown in
water, or if he were to die in any other horrific way, still, a person
having faith in God and His Sant coupled with the knowledge of their
greatness would believe, ‘A devotee of God never suffers from an
The Vachanãmrut

248

adverse outcome; he will certainly attain the abode of God. On the
other hand, even if a non-believer were to die naturally and were to
be cremated in a funeral pyre with sandalwood and full obituary
rites, he will certainly go to Yampuri.’ He would understand the
difference between the two extremely clearly.
10

“So, a person who develops such firm convictions in his heart
should be known as having faith in God and His Sant coupled with
the knowledge of their greatness. A person with such faith will
definitely reach Brahmamahol; he would not reside in any other
lower abode.”
|| Vachanãmrut Loyã-3 || 111 ||

Loyã-4
If One Doubts God, One Cannot Be Said to Have
Overcome Mãyã
1

On Kãrtik vadi 14, Samvat 1877 [4 December 1820], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting in Surã Khãchar’s darbãr in
Loyã. He was wearing a white survãl and a white dagli made of
chhint. He had also tied a white pãgh around His head. At that
time, an assembly of paramhansas as well as devotees from various
places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Akhandãnand Swãmi asked Shriji Mahãrãj, “There
are countless millions of brahmãnds. In those brahmãnds, does the
form of God appear the same as the form in this brahmãnd at this
present time, or not?”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “God always resides in His Akshardhãm.
From the countless Pradhãn-Purush pairs that evolve from
mahãmãyã, countless millions of brahmãnds evolve. Then, for the
sake of His devotees, while still residing at one location in His
Akshardhãm, and by His own wish, that God appears in countless
forms in the countless millions of brahmãnds.”

4

Again Akhandãnand Swãmi asked, “Shri Krishna Nãrãyan
always has a human form, and that form of God is forever satya.
However, that same God appears sometimes as Matsya, Kachchha,
Varãh, Nrusinh and other countless forms. How should this be
understood? Furthermore, is the method of liberation and the form of
God in each brahmãnd the same, or different?”
The Vachanãmrut

249

5

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “The form of God is always the same.
Even then, by His own wish, God shows His form wherever and in
whatever form is required.
He also manifests His powers to
whatever extent is appropriate in various places. He always has two
arms, but by His wish, at times He shows four arms, or eight arms
or even countless arms. He also appears in the form of Matsya,
Kachchha, etc. In this way, He manifests whichever form is
appropriate for the place; but, in fact, He always resides in His abode
in one form.

6

“Furthermore, while remaining in one location, He pervades the
countless millions of brahmãnds through His antaryãmi form. For
example, Vyãsji was one, but when he called out to Shukji, he did so
by residing in all of the mobile and immobile beings. When Shukji
replied, he did so in the same manner. In this way, even great,
realised yogis like Shukji are capable of pervading the entire world.
Such people have attained such yogic powers as fruits of worshipping
God. But, Purushottam Bhagwãn, who is called Yogeshwar, is the
master of all yogic powers. So, while still remaining in one location,
what is surprising about Him manifesting, by His own wish,
wherever and however is appropriate? What is so surprising about
God possessing such abilities? People become astonished even when a
magician displays simple illusions, and they cannot fully comprehend
the magic. But God possesses all yogic powers and is the greatest
source of wonder. So, how can the jiva know Him?

7

“Now, the Shrimad Bhãgwat mentions, ‘This many have
overcome God’s mãyã.’ However, it also mentions, ‘No one has
overcome the force of God’s mãyã.’ Here, one should realise that if
even Brahmã and others doubt God’s yogic powers, then they cannot
be said to have overcome the power of God’s mãyã. What is this
doubt? It is the thought, ‘Why does God behave like that?’ On the
other hand, one who understands God as flawless by believing, ‘God
is capable; so whatever He does is appropriate,’ is said to have
overcome mãyã.

8

“In reality, the method for liberation is the same. But because
there are three levels in the people who worship – the highest, the
intermediate and the lowest – and because there are countless levels
in their shraddhã, there are many differences in the path of
liberation taken by people. But in reality, the path of liberation is
one. After all, there is only one form of God. This God is extremely
The Vachanãmrut

250

powerful and no one, including Akshar, is capable of becoming like
Him. This is an established principle.”
9

Then Muktãnand Swãmi said to Shriji Mahãrãj, “Today,
Jhinãbhãi has become very upset, and he said that since Mahãrãj did
not come to my house, what is the point of me staying in that house?”

10

Hearing this, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “When a person loves
stubbornly and with displeasure, that love does not survive in the
long run. Also, the bhakti and love of one who is stubborn ultimately
become nullified. Therefore, it is a great mistake to wear a sad face
due to displeasure.”

11

Jhinãbhãi then said, “When God and His sãdhus come to one’s
house, one’s face should glow with delight; but when they do not
come, one’s face should definitely reflect disappointment and one
should feel sorrow in one’s heart.”

12

Hearing this remark, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “One should be
pleased when God and His sãdhus come, but one should never grieve.
If one’s nature is to grieve, then ultimately, something misfortunate
is bound to occur. Therefore, while observing one’s own dharma, one
should happily follow God’s commands, but one should never become
upset in order to get one’s own way. If God issues a command to go
somewhere and the person becomes disturbed out of grief, then the
darshan and prasãd previously given by God, the countless types of
talks relating to gnãn, and all other actions by which one had felt
happiness are all lost. Furthermore, due to the disturbance, only
tamogun spreads throughout the mind; so, he goes where he is asked
to go in a state of pure misery. Then, as a result of the agitation, he
cannot carry out the command completely. Therefore, a devotee of
God should remain ever joyful and should worship God with a
cheerful mind. Moreover, however adverse his circumstances may
be, he should not allow even the slightest trace of depression to enter
his heart.”
|| Vachanãmrut Loyã-4 || 112 ||

Loyã-5
Controlling the Indriyas and the Antahkaran
1

On the night of Kãrtik vadi Amãs, Samvat 1877 [5 December
1820], Swãmi Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting in Surã
The Vachanãmrut

251

Khãchar’s darbãr in Loyã. He was wearing a white survãl and a
white dagli made of chhint. He had also tied a white pãgh around
His head. At that time, an assembly of paramhansas as well as
devotees from various places had gathered before Him.
2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj asked all of the paramhansas, “By
revealing which thoughts can one be considered to be honest, and by
not revealing which thoughts can one be considered to be deceitful?”

3

Since the paramhansas were unable to answer, Shriji Mahãrãj
replied, “Any weakness in observing the five religious vows4 which
cannot be overcome by one’s own thought process should be disclosed
before the Sant, who has no such weaknesses. If one has perceived
faults in the Sant, that should also be disclosed. Furthermore, any
doubts in one’s conviction of God should also be disclosed. Then one
can be considered to be honest. If any of these internal thoughts have
arisen, and they are not disclosed before the Sant, then such a person
should be known to be deceitful.”

4

Thereafter Shriji Mahãrãj asked another question: “If a person is
deceitful, and also cunning, how can he be recognised?”

5

Again, the paramhansas were unable to answer.

6

So Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “His deceitfulness can be recognised
by keeping his company, and, while staying with him, by observing
him while he eats, drinks, sits, stands, walks and talks. Also, when
he is separated from oneself, if another person is asked to secretly
observe him, then his deceitfulness would be recognised.”

7

Shriji Mahãrãj then posed another question: “Suppose there is a
person who observes religious vows and keeps faith in God out of
pretence. He is intelligent and egotistical, and he shows his faith and
his observance of religious vows to be superior to the genuine vows
and faith of others. How, then, can one recognise that such a
person’s faith and observance of religious vows are a mere pretence?”

8

Once again, the paramhansas were unable to answer the
question.

9

So again, Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “His pretence can be recognised
when his prestige is offended. Otherwise, it cannot be recognised.”

10

Again, Shriji Mahãrãj asked, “Which thought causes one to
deflect from one’s faith in God and observance of religious vows?
Which type of thought would not cause one to deflect from them?
The Vachanãmrut

252

Also, if there is a time span, for what duration must these thoughts
remain in order to deflect one from one’s dharma and one’s faith in
God?”
11

Again, the paramhansas were unable to answer.

12

So Shriji Mahãrãj said, “If a person attempts to eradicate an
improper thought related to dharma, but the thought still remains;
or, if such a thought does not arise for fifteen days or for a month,
but arises some day suddenly – then such a thought would cause him
to fall from dharma. The same applies to one’s faith in God.
However, any thought which is eradicated by applying a thought
process once it arises, and which does not arise again, would not
cause a person to fall from one’s dharma or one’s faith.”

13

Then Shriji Mahãrãj asked, “Whose foundation in Satsang
becomes solid and whose does not?”

14

Again, the paramhansas could not answer.

15

So Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “Just as Dattãtreya imbibed the
virtues of the five bhuts, the moon, various animals, a prostitute, a
virgin, his own body and others, similarly, only if a person has the
disposition of imbibing the virtues of a sãdhu does his foundation in
Satsang become solid. If a person does not have such a disposition,
then even though he remains in Satsang, his foundation is not firm.”

16

Again, Shriji Mahãrãj asked, “Can the indriyas and the
antahkaran be completely controlled by the company of the Sant, by
reading the scriptures and by applying one’s own thought process?
Or can they be controlled if only one of these three is present? If you
say that all three must be present, then what techniques should be
learnt from the Sant, what techniques should be learnt from the
scriptures, and how should one apply one’s own thought process?
Please explain this.”

17
18

Again, the paramhansas were unable to answer.
Then Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “From the scriptures, one should
realise the greatness of God and His Sant. From the Sant, one
should learn techniques for controlling the indriyas, such as: One’s
vision should be kept fixed on the nose in this manner, and one
should not listen to worldly talks. These and other techniques should
be learnt from the Sant. By one’s own thought process, one should
look upon the techniques taught by the Sant positively, as being for
one’s own liberation. Then, one should behave accordingly. In this
The Vachanãmrut

253

way, the indriyas and antahkaran can be overcome by these three
means.”
19

Then Shriji Mahãrãj posed another question, “Is the antahkaran
controlled by controlling the indriyas, or are the indriyas controlled
by controlling the antahkaran?”

20

Since the paramhansas could not answer the question, Shriji
Mahãrãj replied, “If a person controls the physical indriyas by
physical austerities, and then even after the physical indriyas have
been controlled, if he still firmly observes the niyams of the five
religious vows4, then the antahkaran can be controlled by controlling
the physical indriyas. So, the physical indriyas cannot be controlled
by controlling the antahkaran alone. However, the antahkaran can
be controlled by controlling the physical indriyas. How is that?
Well, if one controls the physical indriyas and does not let them
indulge in the vishays, then the antahkaran within would become
frustrated and would think, ‘This type of enjoyment is not going to be
possible in this life.’”

21

After this, Shriji Mahãrãj asked, “By what means are the
physical indriyas controlled and by what means is the antahkaran
controlled?”

22

Again, since the paramhansas could not answer, Shriji Mahãrãj
replied, “The physical indriyas can be controlled by observing the
niyams specified for a renunciant in the Dharma-shãstras; by
controlling one’s diet; by observing vows like tapta-kruchchhra,
chãndrãyan, etc.; by deliberately tolerating cold, heat, hunger and
thirst; by engaging in the discourses, talks, and devotional songs
related to God; by engaging in worship and remembrance; by
controlling one’s posture and by other spiritual endeavours. The
antahkaran can be controlled by contemplating upon God’s greatness,
by meditating on God and by realising oneself to be the ãtmã.”
|| Vachanãmrut Loyã-5 || 113 ||

Loyã-6
Purifying the Company One Keeps
1

On the night of Mãgshar sudi 1, Samvat 1877 [6 December
1820], Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting in Surã Khãchar’s darbãr in Loyã.
He was wearing a white khes and a white dagli made of chhint. He
The Vachanãmrut

254

had also tied a white feto around His head and had tied a bokãni with
another feto, the chhoglu of which was hanging from His head. In
addition to this, He had covered Himself with a thick, cotton cloth.
At that time, an assembly of paramhansas as well as devotees from
various places had gathered before Him.
2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj asked the paramhansas, “After
joining the Satsang fellowship, what do you consider to be the most
difficult achievement?”

3

The paramhansas could not answer the question, so Shriji
Mahãrãj replied, “For a person to become ekãntik is extremely
difficult. What is this state of being ekãntik? Well, it is to do the
bhakti of God along with dharma, gnãn and vairãgya. That is the
state of being ekãntik.”

4

Again Shriji Mahãrãj asked, “Which one dharma-related
endeavour is such that if practised, all aspects of dharma remain?
Moreover, out of worship, remembrance, singing or listening to
devotional songs, listening to spiritual discourses, and other Godrelated endeavours, which one endeavour, if it is kept even when all
others are abandoned in difficult times, helps maintain all of the
others?”

5

Shriji Mahãrãj answered His own question: “Of the dharmarelated endeavours, if one maintains the vow of non-lust, all other
endeavours will develop. Of the God-related endeavours, if one keeps
the conviction of God, then all of the others will develop.”

6

Again Shriji Mahãrãj asked, “Which type of thinking, if
maintained constantly, is beneficial, and if altered, is detrimental?
Also, which type of thinking is beneficial if repeatedly altered, and
detrimental if not altered?”

7

Again Shriji Mahãrãj answered His own question: “Thoughts
regarding one’s conviction of God should never be altered. In fact, it
would be beneficial if they are repeatedly reinforced by listening to
the greatness of God. Repeatedly altering them, however, would be
detrimental. But, if one has firmly decided in one’s own mind, ‘I
want to do this,’ then that type of thinking should be repeatedly
altered on the advice of a sãdhu. If he suggests, ‘You should not sit
here and should not do this,’ then one should not sit there and should
not do that. If, in this case, one’s own decision is altered, it would be

The Vachanãmrut

255

beneficial; if it is not altered and one does as one pleases, then that
would be detrimental.”
8

Again Shriji Mahãrãj asked, “Despite the fact that he observes
dharma, sitting with and listening to which type of satsangi or
paramhansa would make one subject to developing faults?”

9

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “If a person has faith in God and
observes dharma, but also believes his self to be the body and has
egotism as well as desires for worldly activities, then if God and His
Sant denounce these, he will definitely perceive flaws in God and His
Sant. Then, he will talk about the perceived flaws of God and His
Sant to others and cause them to become like non-believers. One
should not associate with such a person in any way; doing so is
harmful.”

10

Then Shriji Mahãrãj asked, “Which type of sãdhu, even though
he observes dharma and has faith in God, should one not accompany
to bathe, sleep near or hear talks from?”

11

Shriji Mahãrãj answered His own question: “A sãdhu who
discouragingly says, ‘Can the vow of non-lust and other virtues really
be realised in one life? They are realised only by the grace of God;
otherwise liberation is attained after countless lives.
So can
liberation truly be attained in this very life?’ By all means, one
should shun the company of anyone who speaks such discouraging
words. Conversely, someone else claims, ‘We are fulfilled in this very
life. The force of lust, anger, arrogance, matsar, egotism, and other
vicious natures is trivial. By the grace of God and His Sant, we will
destroy them all.’ One should, by all means, seek the company of a
sãdhu who speaks in this manner and is eagerly engaged in methods
to destroy lust and the other vices.”

12

Again Shriji Mahãrãj asked, “Which type of sãdhu, even if he
speaks encouragingly, should be shunned?”

13

Shriji Mahãrãj answered His own question: “If a sãdhu
emphasises his own efforts only and believes himself to be fulfilled by
his own efforts, but does not acknowledge the strength of God and
does not feel, ‘By endeavouring in this way, I want to please God’ –
then such a sãdhu should be shunned.”

14

Again Shriji Mahãrãj asked, “Which type of sãdhu should one
keep the company of, and which type should one not keep the
company of?”
The Vachanãmrut

256

15

Shriji Mahãrãj then replied, “If we are staying with a sãdhu who
observes the religious vows strictly and has firm faith in God, but
who instead of reprimanding us, pampers us and lets us have our
way, then even if he, like Muktãnand Swãmi, is considered great in
public opinion, his company should not be kept. On the other hand,
if a sãdhu repeatedly reprimands one, and maintains constant
vigilance on any swabhãv he sees within one; and if he does not cease
to denounce that swabhãv until it is overcome, and does not merely
flatter, then even if he is not considered great in public view, one
should still keep his company.”

16

Then Shriji Mahãrãj asked another question: “Suppose a sãdhu
possesses all of the glorious virtues of bhakti, gnãn, etc. However, on
account of which one vicious flaw should one avoid his company?”

17

Again Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “If he is very lazy, sleeps too much
and when told by others to bathe, meditate or observe other niyams,
says, ‘I’ll do it later; what’s the hurry? I’ll do them slowly’ – then
even though he may appear to be good, one should avoid his
company.”

18

Again Shriji Mahãrãj asked a question: “A sãdhu may speak
well; but, due to which fault in his speech should his talks not be
heard?”

19

Shriji Mahãrãj then replied, “If, out of vanity, he talks about the
bhakti, gnãn, vairãgya and dharma within himself to be superior;
and shows the virtues of gnãn, bhakti, etc., in other sãdhus to be
inferior, then one should not listen to his talks.”

20

Once again Shriji Mahãrãj asked, “Which type of speech should
be viewed as amrut even though it is harsh?”

21

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “The words of a sãdhu who in his speech
denounces his own parents, sister, brother and caste with harsh
words, should be known to be good. Why? Because one who hears
those words realises the virtues of that sãdhu; i.e., ‘In no way does
this sãdhu have attachment to his bodily relations or others.’
Therefore, those words should be enjoyed like amrut.”

22

Again Shriji Mahãrãj posed a question, “When should one
maintain conceit, and when should one not maintain conceit?”

23

Once again Shriji Mahãrãj supplied the answer: “One should not
maintain conceit before a staunch follower of God, even though he
may be a simple and meek devotee. On the other hand, one should
The Vachanãmrut

257

certainly maintain conceit before a person who has fallen back from
Satsang. In fact, one should not become suppressed by him, and in
any question-answer exchange, his words should be answered with
stern words of one’s own.”
24

Then Shriji Mahãrãj asked, “When should one not have a desire
for the darshan, etc., of God and His Sant? When should one have
such a desire?”

25

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “Suppose I were to ask all of the sãdhus,
‘Who will go to Burãnpur and Kãshi?’ Then, when no one speaks,
one should rise in the assembly and say to Me, ‘Mahãrãj, if you say
so, I shall go.’ So saying, one should follow My command and go
there. In those situations, to gain My pleasure, one should not keep
any desire for keeping the company of the Sant or My darshan, etc.

26

“Moreover, when one, who a sãdhu or I have grieved, rebuked,
insulted or expelled, and who is crying out of that shock, is
approached by a non-believer, such as an ekadmal, who starts to talk
about the flaws of the sãdhu or Me, then before him, one should
exhibit tremendous affection towards the sãdhu and God. One should
say, ‘I am His servant, and even if He were to cut me to pieces, I
would still never perceive flaws in Him. He will grant Me liberation.’
In that situation, one should exhibit such great affection.”

27

Again Shriji Mahãrãj asked, “What should not be done, even if
God is pleased by it? What should be done, even if God is displeased
by it?”

28

Shriji Mahãrãj answered His own question: “If I were to give an
order which seems to be full of adharma, then one should be hesitant
in following it; that is, one should take some time and not accept it
immediately. For example, Shri Krishna Bhagwãn ordered Arjun,
‘Cut off Ashwatthãmã’s head.’
But Arjun did not follow that
command. Likewise, even if I am pleased by it, that type of
instruction should not be followed. Also, an instruction by which the
prescribed niyams of the five religious vows4 are transgressed should
not be followed. If by not obeying these two types of commands, God
is displeased, then one should definitely let Him be displeased; in
those cases, one should not attempt to please Him.”

29

Once again Shriji Mahãrãj asked, “While meditating on God,
countless different waves of vicious thoughts arise in the mind, just

The Vachanãmrut

258

as large waves arise in the ocean. When such thoughts do arise, how
can they be suppressed?”
30

Shriji Mahãrãj answered His own question: “When such vicious
thoughts arise, one should stop the meditation, and should clap and
chant ‘Swãminãrãyan, Swãminãrãyan’ aloud, without shame. One
should pray to God, ‘O Lord! You are a friend of the meek! You are
an ocean of mercy!’ Also, one should remember a great sãdhu of God,
like Muktãnand Swãmi, and pray to him too. As a result of this, all
disturbing thoughts will be eradicated and peace will prevail. Apart
from this, there is no other method to eradicate such thoughts.”

31

Then Shriji Mahãrãj posed another question: “Which virtue
should be renounced, even if it is believed to be a great virtue in this
Satsang and is being praised by all? Which fault, even though it is a
fault, is suitable to be imbibed?”

32

Once again Shriji Mahãrãj supplied the answer Himself: “One
may be like Muktãnand Swãmi and may be observing religious vows
more resolutely than all; however, if as a result of this, another
sãdhu feels inferior because he cannot behave on the same level with
the former, then that virtue, even though it may be great, should be
renounced. Instead, one should behave on the same level as all of the
other sãdhus. Even though behaving on the same level as others is a
drawback, it should be imbibed.”

33

Again Shriji Mahãrãj asked, “In these sãdhus, which is the one
flaw which, when abandoned, would cause all flaws to be abandoned?
Which is the one virtue which, if cultivated, would cause all virtues
to be cultivated?”

34

Shriji Mahãrãj answered, “All flaws reside in the flaw of
identifying one’s self with the body. If that is abandoned, all flaws
are abandoned. Furthermore, if the sole virtue of ãtmã-realisation,
i.e., realising oneself as the ãtmã, distinct from the body, is
developed, then all virtues will develop.”

35

Shriji Mahãrãj again asked, “Which types of vishays, when
indulged in, enlighten the mind, and which types of vishays, when
indulged in, cause ignorance to prevail in the mind?”

36

Again Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “By indulging in God-related
vishays, the mind is enlightened; and by indulging in worldly
vishays, ignorance prevails in the mind.”
The Vachanãmrut

259

37

Next, Shriji Mahãrãj asked, “Which places, which times, which
company and which actions should one not associate with, even if it
is God’s command?”

38

Shriji Mahãrãj again supplied the answer Himself: “Even if it is
God’s command, a sãdhu should not stay in a place where he has
frequent contact with his bodily relations. Also, if I seat one where
women can also be seen while having My darshan, and if I were to
say, ‘Do My darshan,’ then one should not sit in such a place.
Rather, one should make an excuse and leave. Further, if adverse
times are prevailing and riots are taking place, then even if it is
God’s command to stay, one should leave that place; but one should
not stay there and suffer beatings.”

39

Then Shriji Mahãrãj asked another question: “Which scriptures
should be heard and studied, and which scriptures should not be
heard or studied?”

40

Once again Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “Scriptures which do not
promote God possessing a form and do not describe God’s avatãrs, but
instead discuss pure Vedãnta and propound a single, formless entity,
should never be studied or heard, even if they have been written by
someone very intelligent. Also, even though they may be merely
devotional songs like those composed by Ranchhod Bhakta, if they
describe God’s form, they should be sung and heard. Such scriptures
should also be studied and heard.”
|| Vachanãmrut Loyã-6 || 114 ||

Loyã-7
Realising God through the Indriyas,
the Antahkaran and Experience
1

On Mãgshar sudi 3, Samvat 1877 [7 December 1820], Shriji
Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot in Surã Khãchar’s
darbãr in Loyã. His head was adorned with a white pãgh, from
which a chhoglu emerged from one side. He was wearing a white
dagli made of chhint and a white, cotton-padded survãl. He had also
covered Himself with a white blanket. At that time, an assembly of
munis as well as devotees from various places had gathered before
Him.
The Vachanãmrut

260

2

In the assembly, Nityãnand Swãmi brought the Vachanãmrut
manuscript and presented it to Shriji Mahãrãj. Shriji Mahãrãj
examined the manuscript and was extremely pleased. He then said
to the paramhansas, “Today, please ask complex questions so that we
may talk.”

3

Thereupon Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “The Shrutis state: ‘´§Ã

ôÊÊŸÊÛÊ ◊ÈÁQ§—– ’i and ‘Ã◊fl ÁflÁŒàflÊÁÃ◊ÎàÿÈ◊ÁÃ ŸÊãÿ— ¬ãÕÊ ÁfllÃ˘ÿŸÊÿ– ’ii.

These Vedic verses proclaim that the jiva attains liberation only
when it realises the true gnãn of God. If liberation can only be
attained by gnãn, why do the scriptures also prescribe other spiritual
endeavours for attaining liberation?”
4

Hearing this question, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Gnãn means ‘to
know’.”

5

At this point, Nityãnand Swãmi raised a doubt. He said, “If
gnãn means merely ‘to know’, then the whole world knows God
through the scriptures, yet everyone does not attain liberation.”

6

Hearing this, Shriji Mahãrãj raised a question: “Just as one does
not attain liberation by knowing the previously incarnated forms of
God through the scriptures, do you think all those who actually had
the darshan of Rãm, Krishna and the other avatãrs of God with their
own eyes attained liberation?”

7

Muktãnand Swãmi replied, “Those who merely see the manifest
form of God attain liberation only after several lives.”

8

Shriji Mahãrãj added, “Those who know God through the
scriptures also receive liberation after several lives. Why? Because
whom these people know through the scriptures is whom the other
people see with their eyes; and whom the other people see with their
eyes is whom these people know through the scriptures. Thus, the

i Rute gnãnãn-na muktihi

There is no liberation without gnãn.
Hiranyakeshiyashãkã Shruti
ii Tam-eva viditvãtimrutyum-eti nãnyaha panthã vidyate’yanãya||

Only by knowing Him does one transgress death; there is no other path for
attaining [liberation].
Shvetãshvatara Upanishad: 3.8

The Vachanãmrut

261

resulting fruits of both are equal, and both attain liberation after
several lives.
9

“After all, is not hearing God with one’s ears gnãn? It is, but
that can be said to be merely hearing God. Is not touching God with
one’s skin also gnãn? It is, but that can be said to be merely
touching God. Is not seeing God with one’s eyes gnãn? It is, but that
is merely seeing God. Is not smelling God with one’s nose gnãn as
well? It is, but that is merely smelling God. Does not describing God
with one’s tongue also constitute gnãn? It does, but that is merely
having described God. In this way, gnãn can be attained through the
physical indriyas. It can also be attained through the antahkaran as
well as directly from experiential gnãn of the jiva, which transcends
both the indriyas and the antahkaran. Of these, which gnãn are you
speaking of?

10

“In fact, in order to create the cosmos, God assumed the form of
Aniruddha, within which dwells the mobile and immobile world along
with space. In the form of Sankarshan, God destroys the cosmos. In
the form of Pradyumna, He sustains the cosmos. He also assumes
various avatãrs such as Matsya, Kachchha, etc. He assumes these
forms according to whichever task needs to be accomplished in
whichever place. Some of these tasks are such that they are
imperceptible to the indriyas and antahkaran, and can only be
known by experiencei . For the successful completion of these tasks,
God assumes a form accordingly. On the other hand, some of these
tasks are perceptible to the indriyas and antahkaran. For the
successful completion of these tasks, again God assumes an
appropriate form. Thus, the gnãn of which of God’s forms is
instrumental in attaining liberation? Is that your question?”

11

Nityãnand Swãmi confirmed, “We are saying that liberation is
attained by the gnãn of God whose form can be realised by the
indriyas, the antahkaran, and experience.”

12

Shriji Mahãrãj then explained, “That God is Shri Krishna. He
has said of himself:
i

Throughout this Vachanãmrut, ‘experience’ should be understood to mean
‘experiential gnãn through the jiva’ because it refers to the gnãn of the divine
form of God, not just the form of God that is perceivable through the senses or
mind.

The Vachanãmrut

262

ÿS◊ÊàˇÊ⁄U◊ÃËÃÙ˘„U◊ˇÊ⁄UÊŒÁ¬ øÙ?Ê◊—–
•ÃÙ˘ÁS◊ ‹Ù∑§ flŒ ø ¬˝ÁÕÃ— ¬ÈL§·Ù?Ê◊—H i
ÁflCÔUèÿÊ„UÁ◊Œ¢ ∑Î§àF◊∑§Ê¢‡ÊŸ ÁSÕÃÙ ¡ªÃ˜H ii
◊?Ê— ¬⁄UÃ⁄¢ ŸÊãÿÁà∑§Á@ŒÁSÃ œŸTÿ–
◊Áÿ ‚fl¸Á◊Œ¢ ¬˝ÙÃ¢ ‚ÍòÊ ◊ÁáÊªáÊÊ ßflH iii

¬‡ÿ ◊ ¬ÊÕ¸ M§¬ÊÁáÊ ‡ÊÃ‡ÊÙ˘Õ ‚„Ud‡Ê—–
ŸÊŸÊÁflœÊÁŸ ÁŒ√ÿÊÁŸ ŸÊŸÊfláÊÊ¸∑Î§ÃËÁŸ øH iv
In these and many other verses, he describes himself as
imperceptible to the indriyas and the antahkaran. Thus, knowing
God perfectly means knowing the manifest form of God through the
indriyas, the antahkaran, and experience. Only then can one be said
to possess perfect gnãn. However, if any one of these three types of
gnãn is lacking, one cannot be said to have realised ultimate gnãn,
nor can one overcome the cycle of births and deaths. In fact, even
though someone may have attained the brahmaswarup state through
i Yasmãt-ksharam-ateeto’ham-aksharãd-api chottamaha|

Ato’smi loke vede cha prathitaha purushottamha||
I transcend all that is perishable and am greater than even the imperishable;
therefore I am known in the Smrutis and Vedas as ‘Purushottam’.
Bhagwad Gitã: 15.18
ii Vishtabhyãham-idam krutsnam-ekãnshena sthito jagat||
I sustain the entire universe with a single fragment [of myself].
Bhagwad Gitã: 10.42
iii Mattaha parataram nãnyat-kinchid-asti dhananjaya|
Mayi sarvam-idam protam sootre maniganã iva||
O Conqueror of Wealth [Arjun]! There is nothing at all that is greater than me.
All this [creation] is strung upon me – like a series of gems on a thread.
Bhagwad Gitã: 7.7
iv Pashya me pãrth roopãni shatasho’tha sahasrashaha|
Nãnã-vidhãni divyãni nãnã-varnãkruteeni cha||
O Son of Pruthã [Arjun]! Behold my hundreds and thousands of divine forms
that are of various types and of assorted colours and shapes.
Bhagwad Gitã: 11.5

The Vachanãmrut

263

his personal endeavours, if he does not realise the manifest form of
God in this manner, he cannot be said to possess perfect gnãn. That
is why it is said in the Shrimad Bhãgwat:

ŸÒc∑§êÿ¸◊åÿëÿÈÃ÷ÊflflÁ¡¸Ã¢ Ÿ ‡ÊÙ÷Ã ôÊÊŸ◊‹¢ ÁŸ⁄UTŸ◊˜– i
The Gitã also states:

∑§◊¸áÊÙ sÔÁ¬ ’Ùh√ÿ¢ ’Ùh√ÿ¢ ø Áfl∑§◊¸áÊ—–
•∑§◊¸áÊp ’Ùh√ÿ¢ ª„UŸÊ ∑§◊¸áÊÙ ªÁÃ—H ii
Even in the state of non-karma, i.e., gnãn, there is still something
left to be realised. That is to say, even after one has become
brahmarup, one still has to realise Parabrahma Purushottam. Only
one who is brahmarup has the right to offer bhakti to Purushottam.
13

“Now, what constitutes bhakti?
It is when one becomes
brahmarup and performs the bhakti of the manifest form of God with
sandalwood paste, flowers, shravan, manan, etc. – just as the
niranna-muktas of Shwetdwip, having become brahmarup, perform
puja of Parabrahma Nãrãyan by offering various types of offerings
such as sandalwood paste, flowers, etc. Thus, God has mentioned in
the Gitã:

’˝rÊÔ÷ÍÃ— ¬˝‚ÛÊÊà◊Ê Ÿ ‡ÊÙøÁÃ Ÿ ∑§ÊæU˜ˇÊÁÃ–
‚◊— ‚fl¸·È ÷ÍÃ·È ◊jÁQ¢§ ‹÷Ã ¬⁄UÊ◊˜H iii
i

Naishkarmyam-apyachuta-bhãva-varjitam
niranjanam|

na

shobhate

gnãnam-alam

Indeed, even pure gnãn – wherein all karmas have been renounced – is not
elegant if it is devoid of bhakti towards God.
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 1.5.12
ii Karmano hyapi boddhavyam boddhavyam cha vikarmanaha|
Akarmanash-cha boddhavyam gahanã karmano gatihi||
[The nature of] karma should be understood, [the nature of] prohibited karmas
should be understood, and [the nature of] non-karma should also be understood.
Indeed, the way of karma is very complex.
Bhagwad Gitã: 4.17
iii Brahma-bhootaha prasannãtmã na shochati na kãnkshati|
Samaha sarveshu bhooteshu mad-bhaktim labhate parãm||
One who has become brahmarup remains joyful, grieves nothing, desires
nothing, behaves equally with all beings, and attains my supreme bhakti.
Bhagwad Gitã: 18.54

The Vachanãmrut

264

Thus, one who does not offer bhakti to Parabrahma after becoming
brahmarup cannot be said to have attained ultimate liberation.
14

“Furthermore,

÷ÍÁ◊⁄UÊ¬Ù˘Ÿ‹Ù flÊÿÈ— π¢ ◊ŸÙ ’ÈÁh⁄Ufl ø–
•„UæU˜∑§Ê⁄U ßÃËÿ¢ ◊ Á÷ÛÊÊ ¬˝∑Î§ÁÃ⁄UCÔUœÊH i
This describes the all-pervaded jad prakruti. Also,

•¬⁄UÿÁ◊ÃSàflãÿÊ¢ ¬˝∑Î§ÁÃ¢ ÁflÁh ◊ ¬⁄UÊ◊˜–
¡Ëfl÷ÍÃÊ¢ ◊„UÊ’Ê„UÙ ÿÿŒ¢ œÊÿ¸Ã ¡ªÃ˜H ii
Such is the all-pervasive chaitanya prakruti. That manifest form of
God is such that He is the supporter of both the eight forms of
pervaded jad prakruti and also of the chaitanya prakruti that
pervades therein. For example, ãkãsh is the supporter of the other
four elements – pruthvi, jal, etc. Whenever pruthvi contracts, ãkãsh
contracts along with it. When the pruthvi expands, ãkãsh also
expands along with it. Similarly, ãkãsh also contracts and expands
along with the contraction and expansion of jal, tej and vãyu.
However, pruthvi and the other elements all contract and expand
within ãkãsh. In the same way, God expands and contracts along
with the expansion and contraction of the two prakrutis, while they
themselves contract and expand within God Himself. That God is
the ãtmã of all. This fact is stated in the Shrutis: ‘•ãÃ—¬˝ÁflCÔU— ‡ÊÊSÃÊ

¡ŸÊŸÊ¢ ‚flÊ¸à◊Ê–’iii; ‘ÿSÿÊˇÊ⁄¢ ‡Ê⁄UË⁄¢... ∞· ‚fl¸÷ÍÃÊãÃ⁄UÊà◊Ê˘¬„UÃ¬Êå◊Ê ÁŒ√ÿÙ Œfl
i Bhoomir-ãpo’nalo vãyuhu kham mano buddhir-eva cha|

Ahamkãra iteeyam me bhinnã prakrutir-ashtadhã||
Pruthvi, jal, tej, vãyu, ãkãsh, man, buddhi and ahamkãr – these are my eight
forms of prakruti,…
Bhagwad Gitã: 7.4
ii Apareyam-itas-tvanyãm prakrutim viddhi me parãm|
Jeeva-bhootãm mahãbãho yayedam dhãryate jagat||
…the lower prakruti. But O Mighty-armed (Arjun)! Also know my other
prakruti – the transcendental prakruti – the very element of life [i.e. chaitanya],
by which this world is upheld.
Bhagwad Gitã: 7.5
iii Antah-pravishtaha shãstã janãnãm sarvãtmã|
God, who enters within all, is the controller and ãtmã of all beings.

The Vachanãmrut

265

∞∑§Ù ŸÊ⁄UÊÿáÊ—– ’i; ‘ÿSÿÊà◊Ê ‡Ê⁄UË⁄¢ ÿ •Êà◊ÊŸ◊ãÃ⁄UÙ ÿ◊ÿÁÃ ‚ Ã
•Êà◊ÊãÃÿÊ¸êÿ◊ÎÃ—– ’ii; and ‘ÿSÿ ¬ÎÁ ÕflË ‡Ê⁄UË⁄¢ ÿ— ¬ÎÁÕflË◊ãÃ⁄UÙ ÿ◊ÿÁÃ ‚ Ã
•Êà◊ÊãÃÿÊ¸êÿ◊ÎÃ—– ’iii.
15

“Furthermore, even food, the mind, knowledge and bliss have
been described as Brahma; that is, various such types of
brahmavidyã have been mentioned. What is the significance of this?
Well, even those things have been called Brahma because God is the
cause of all and the supporter of all. However, they are all the
sharir, and their shariri is the manifest form of Shri Krishna
Purushottam. Both the jad and chaitanya prakrutis, along with
entities evolved thereof in their expanded and contracted states, dwell
easily within God. Moreover, God dwells within them all as their
antaryãmi and as their cause. It is that very God who is this
manifest form. To know and see God with such an understanding of
greatness is called perfect gnãn.”

16

Thereupon Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “If a person cannot
experience the greatness of God in this manner, but does have a firm
conviction of it in his antahkaran, then can that be said to be perfect
gnãn, or not?”

17

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “In a dark house, one can faintly see the
grain-store, the pillars, etc.; but due to the darkness, they cannot be
Yajur Veda: Ãranyak-3.11
Yasyãksharam shareeram… esha sarva-bhootãntarãtmã’pahata-pãpmã divyo
deva eko nãrãyanaha|
i

He, whose sharir is the imperishable,… is the indwelling ãtmã of all beings, is
devoid of all evil, and is the one divine God, Nãrãyan.
Subãla Upanishad: 7.1
ii
Yasyãtmã
shareeram
ya
ãtmãnam-antaro
yamayati
sa
ta
ãtmãntaryãmyamrutaha|
He, whose sharir are the ãtmãs and who governs all ãtmãs from within, is your
ãtmã, the antaryãmi, and immortal.
Bruhadãranyaka Upanishad: 5.7.26
iii Yasya pruthivee shareeram yaha pruthiveem-antaro yamayati sa ta
ãtmãntaryãmyamrutaha|
He, whose sharir is pruthvi and who governs it from within, is your ãtmã, the
antaryãmi, and is immortal.
Bruhadãranyaka Upanishad: 5.7.7

The Vachanãmrut

266

said to have been seen totally. In the same way, both the jad and
chaitanya prakrutis reside within Purushottam Bhagwãn, and He
dwells within them as well. But if one experiences this only by
inference and does not actually see it, then he cannot be said to
possess perfect gnãn. Nevertheless, because he has such a firm
conviction, he surely must have experienced some sort of
transcendental powers of God in the past; if not, he will experience
them in the future.
18

“Despite having such a doubtless conviction, if one does not
experience that transcendence, one should think, ‘God possesses all
those powers, but He does not reveal them to me because that is His
wish.’ If a person offers bhakti to God with such understanding and
remains fulfilled, then he can also be said to possess perfect gnãn.

19

“Thus, a devotee with gnãn is one who thoroughly knows God
through the indriyas, the antahkaran, and experience. Such a
devotee has been praised in the Gitã as the best of all devotees:

•ÊÃÙ¸ Á¡ôÊÊ‚È⁄UÕÊÕË¸ ôÊÊŸË ø ÷⁄UÃ·¸÷H...
Ã·Ê¢ ôÊÊŸË ÁŸàÿÿÈQ ∞∑§÷ÁQ Áfl¸Á‡ÊcÿÃ– i
Such a devotee with gnãn faithfully serves the manifest form of God –
who eternally has a form – realising Him as transcending PrakrutiPurush and Akshar, and as being the cause and supporter of all.
Such understanding constitutes gnãn, and such gnãn leads to
ultimate liberation. Some who do not understand this merely claim
‘•„¢ ’˝rÊÔÊÁS◊’ii from the scriptures. They proclaim, ‘I am the form of
i Ãrto jignãsur-arthãrthee gnãnee cha bharatarshabha||…

Teshãm gnãnee nitya-yukta eka-bhaktir-vishishyate|
O Supreme among the Descendants of Bharat [Arjun]! [Four types of virtuous
persons worship me:] one who is distressed [from having fallen from the path of
attaining yogic powers, and thus still wishes to attain them]; one who seeks
knowledge [of the ãtmã, i.e. ãtmã-realisation]; one who desires material objects
[i.e. material pleasures and powers]; and one who has gnãn. Of these, the one
with gnãn is the best because he is always engaged in me and is devoted to me
alone.
Bhagwad Gitã: 7.16 & 17
ii Aham brahmãsmi
I am Brahma.
Bruhadãranyaka Upanishad: 3.4.10

The Vachanãmrut

267

Brahma, and Rãm, Krishna, etc., are merely manifestations
emanating from me.’ Such sacrilegious, unorthodox Vedãntis of
today are extremely evil and grave sinners. At death, they are
consigned to narak, and they will never be released from there.”
|| Vachanãmrut Loyã-7 || 115 ||

Loyã-8
Eradicating the Over-Excitability of the Indriyas;
Accepting Only Words Related to One’s Inclination
1

On the night of Mãgshar sudi 5, Samvat 1877 [10 December
1820], Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting in Surã Khãchar’s darbãr in Loyã.
He was wearing a white khes and had tied a white feto around His
head. He was also wearing a white dagli made of chhint. At that
time, an assembly of paramhansas as well as devotees from various
places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Muktãnand Swãmi asked Shriji Mahãrãj, “On seeing
some inappropriate swabhãv of a sãdhu, one who is thoughtless may
perceive flaws in the sãdhu. But why does one who is wise perceive
flaws in the sãdhu?”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “If a person is wise and has noticed an
inappropriate swabhãv within himself, and while harbouring an
intense aversion towards it, is continually endeavouring to overcome
that swabhãv, then when he sees that very same swabhãv in another
sãdhu, he develops an aversion towards that sãdhu. On the other
hand, a fool not only does not overcome his own swabhãvs, but when
he sees that same swabhãv in another sãdhu, he perceives flaws in
that sãdhu. Such a person should be considered a fool.”

4

Then Shriji Mahãrãj gathered the junior paramhansas, and He
Himself asked and answered questions.

5

First, He asked, “The intensity and mildness of the force of lust,
anger, avarice, and other inner enemies is due to the phases of
childhood, youth and old age. In what way? Well, in childhood, the
force is weak; in youth, the force is intense; then in old age, the force
becomes weak again. Thus, the intensity and mildness of lust,
anger, etc., can be noticed; but can they be weakened by any thought
process?”
The Vachanãmrut

268

6

Shriji Mahãrãj Himself replied, “The force of lust, anger, etc.,
can be weakened by a thought process, which is as follows: The
mildness of those swabhãvs in childhood, their greater intensity in
youth, and mildness once again in old age is due to food. Specifically,
in childhood, since the dietary intake is small, the force of lust is
mild. Similarly, in old age, one’s dietary intake is small, so again the
force of lust is mild. But in youth, as the dietary intake increases,
lust also increases. Therefore, in youth, if one’s food intake is
decreased, and if one deliberately tolerates cold, heat, rain and
hunger, then by maintaining such a thought process, and by
maintaining profound association with the great Sant, the force of
lust is weakened – even in the period of youth.”

7

Again Shriji Mahãrãj asked, “People become addicted to many
different types of things, for example, bhang, marijuana, opium,
alcohol, etc. Are these addictions due to one’s kriyamãn or prãrabdha
karmas?”

8

Replying, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “These addictions are developed
not by prãrabdha, but by habit. Therefore, if one maintains courage,
keeps shraddhã, and becomes adamant on overcoming the addiction,
then it can be overcome. But if one has no shraddhã and is
cowardly, then that vice cannot be overcome.”

9

Then Shriji Mahãrãj asked, “Some children have a mature
nature like elder people, whereas some have an extremely fidgety
nature. Is that nature due to company, or is it inherent within their
jiva?”

10

Shriji Mahãrãj answered, “For the most part, a good or bad
nature is due to the company one keeps, but in some cases, it is due
to past karmas.”

11

Then Kapileshwarãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, how can one
recognise a swabhãv which has formed previously, and how can one
recognise a swabhãv which has formed recently?”

12

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “A recently formed swabhãv is overcome
by staying in the company of a pious sãdhu and by making a little
effort to eradicate it. Just as grass growing on a wall dries up when
there is no rain for five days, similarly, a recently formed swabhãv
can be overcome in a few days. However, an established swabhãv
can barely be overcome, even after one makes a great effort to
eradicate it. For example, if there are strong weeds or a bordi tree in
The Vachanãmrut

269

the soil, then even if they are set on fire and burnt by a farmer, they
will still re-sprout. But if one uses a hoe to uproot them from their
roots, they can be removed. Similarly, if one remains in the company
of a pious sãdhu and perseveres with great effort, even an established
swabhãv can be overcome, but only with great effort.”
13

Then Shriji Mahãrãj asked, “For one whose indriyas are overly
excitable, what are the individual methods by which that excitability
can be overcome?”

14

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “To overcome the excitability of the eyes,
a person should fix his gaze on the tip of his nose and not look
elsewhere. He should continue to study while studying, and he
should also engage in worship. While doing this, if he continues to
keep his eyes open without blinking for half an hour or so – until his
eyes begin to burn intensely and tears flow – and he does not harbour
a debased thought even if he happens to notice a woman or other
objects, then even if his eyes are excitable, they will become
controlled.

15

“The nose does not like the odours coming from someone’s body,
mouth or clothes. At that time, a person should think, ‘My own body
appears attractive superficially, but it is filled with blood, flesh and
bones; and in the abdomen there is faeces, urine and the intestines.’
If he thinks in this way the over-excitability of the nose is eradicated.

16

“The over-excitability of the ears can be eradicated as follows:
When some humorous talks are on-going or a folk-drama is being
performed, one develops a keen interest to listen to them; whereas,
while listening to the discourses and devotional songs related to God,
one falls asleep. In that situation, one should rise and subdue sleep
and lethargy. One should also keep faith in and maintain a keen
interest in listening to the discourses of God; thereby, the ears can be
controlled.

17

“The sense of touch can be controlled by deliberately tolerating
the cold, heat and rain; by lying down anywhere; by keeping a
blanket as a pillow and using it for covering the body only when one
feels very cold. Thereby, the skin becomes numbed, and the overexcitability of the sense of touch is eradicated.

18

“To overcome the over-excitability of the hands, whenever the
hands are idle, one should keep a rosary in one’s hand and turn it
while chanting the name of God in rhythm with the inhaling and
The Vachanãmrut

270

exhaling of one’s breath. One should not, however, turn the rosary
hurriedly. Some say, ‘One can chant the name of God more quickly
mentally.’ But that principle is wrong because, in actuality, the
mind can chant the name of God only as many times as the tongue
can chant the name of God. So, by applying this method, the overexcitability of the hands is eradicated.
19

“If the legs are overly active, they can be controlled by
controlling one’s sitting posture.

20

“Overly excitable genitals can be controlled as follows: When one
gets scabies or ringworm, and one scratches oneself, the itching is
not relieved until bleeding occurs. However, if one does not scratch
the affected area, then the itching subsides by itself. Thus, even if an
itching sensation arises on the genitals, it should not be scratched.
Moreover, in the case of it becoming frequently excited, if one
decreases one’s diet, observes fasts and physically weakens the body,
then the genitals can be controlled.

21

“To conquer the tongue, it should not be given items that it
likes, and one’s diet should be restricted. Thereby, the overexcitability of the tongue is eradicated.

22

“Finally, the over-activity of one’s speech can be eradicated by
not interrupting with wise remarks when people like Muktãnand
Swãmi are speaking or narrating from a scripture. Moreover, if one
does happen to interrupt, one should turn a rosary 25 times.
Thereby, the over-activity of speech can be eradicated.”

23

Then Shriji Mahãrãj asked, “Of all these indriyas, which one, if
fully controlled, leads to control over all of the other indriyas?”

24

Shriji Mahãrãj answered His own question, “If the tongue is
fully subdued, then all of the other indriyas can be subdued.”

25

Again Shriji Mahãrãj asked, “If lust pervades a person’s heart,
and even though his genitals are covered by his clothes, how can one
realise that he has been pervaded by lust?”

26

Shriji Mahãrãj Himself replied, “When lust pervades a person,
his eyes and all of his other indriyas become overly excited. Thereby,
one can realise that he has become overwhelmed by lust.”

27

Once again, Shriji Mahãrãj asked, “One who has an overactive
nature should become calm, and one who has a calm nature should
become active. By which thought process can this be achieved?”
The Vachanãmrut

271

28

Shriji Mahãrãj Himself replied, “If a person who is overactive
thinks, ‘I am the ãtmã, Brahmai , genderless, and stable like ãkãsh,’
and he attains the upsham state through such thoughts, then he
becomes calm. If a person who is calm wishes to become more active,
then he should realise the greatness of God and His devotees. When
he realises the greatness of God, he engages in the nine types of
bhakti and performs the menial service of the devotees of God.
Consequently, his nature becomes more active.”

29

Then Shriji Mahãrãj asked, “Is there anything in the eight
scriptures13 such as the Shrimad Bhãgwat, etc., which should be
disregarded, or should everything be imbibed?”

30

Replying to His own question, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “In all of
those scriptures there are countless incidents, and through all of
those incidents, the inclinations of the devotees who have attained
God are described. Therefore, they are all suitable to be imbibed.
However, among all of these incidents, only those incidents that
match one’s own inclination should be imbibed. The others, however,
may be disregarded with the understanding, ‘These talks are true,
but they are for the benefit of other devotees; they are not for me.’”

31

Once more, Shriji Mahãrãj asked, “All of you youngsters are
seated here; and from amongst you, all of the sãdhus certify some
and do not certify others. Now, all of you are of a similar age and all
have the same company. In fact, all have the same food, clothing,
mode of worship, scriptures, and mantra; and all listen to the same
spiritual discourses. What, then, is the reason for the difference in
levels amongst you? Moreover, he who is a sãdhu observes dharma
completely, is unbiased and views all equally; hence, he would
describe everyone as they truly are. So, please answer the question.”

32

Again, Shriji Mahãrãj supplied the reply, “Only he who has
shraddhã is praised by a sãdhu, and that is also why he observes
dharma more staunchly. Also, he has shraddhã in serving the Sant
and in listening to the talks of God. He also has faith in the Sant.
Therefore, he has progressed. On the other hand, one who has not
progressed despite staying in such association, should be known to
lack shraddhã.”

i Here ‘Brahma’ should be understood as ‘brahmarup’.

The Vachanãmrut

272

|| Vachanãmrut Loyã-8 || 116 ||

Loyã-9
Factors which Lead to the Development of
Dharma, Gnãn, Vairãgya and Bhakti
1

On Mãgshar sudi 6, Samvat 1877 [11 December 1820], Shriji
Mahãrãj was sitting in Surã Khãchar’s darbãr in Loyã. He was
wearing a white dagli made of chhint as well as a white survãl. He
had also tied a white feto around His head. At that time, an
assembly of paramhansas as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him.

2

Then Shriji Mahãrãj requested, “May all of the paramhansas
please engage in a question-answer session amongst themselves.”

3

Thereupon Ãtmãnand Swãmi asked Akhandãnand Swãmi,
“What are the factors that lead to the development of the four virtues
of vairãgya, gnãn, bhakti and dharma?”

4

Shriji Mahãrãj answered the question, “Vairãgya is cultivated
when one comes to realise the nature of kãl. What is this nature of
kãl? Well, it is to know the process of nitya-pralay, nimitta-pralay,
prãkrut-pralay and ãtyantik-pralay, as well as the lifespan of all
beings from Brahmã to the smallest blade of grass. After knowing
this, if one realises the body, the brahmãnd and all other objects to be
subject to the force of kãl, then vairãgya would arise.

5

“Gnãn arises if one listens to the Upanishads such as the
Bruhadãranya Upanishad, Chhãndogya Upanishad, Kathavalli
Upanishad, etc.; the Bhagwad Gitã; the Vãsudev Mãhãtmya; the
Vyãs Sutras and other scriptures from a Satpurush.

6

“Dharma arises if one listens to the Yãgnavalkya Smruti, Manu
Smruti, Parãshar Smruti, Shankh-likhit Smruti and other Smrutis.
By doing so, dharma would arise, and one would develop faith in
those scriptures.

7

“Bhakti arises if one realises the divine manifestations of God.
How should one realise them? Well, when one hears about the forms
of God that are in each khand; and when one hears about the abodes
of God – Golok, Vaikunth, Brahmapur, Shwetdwip, etc.; and when
one listens with a sense of awe to talks of the divine actions of God
The Vachanãmrut

273

describing the creation, sustenance and dissolution of the cosmos;
and when one listens with keen interest to the narration of the divine
actions and incidents of Rãm, Krishna and the other avatãrs of God,
then bhakti towards God would develop.
8

“Now, even though a person in his initial stages has an
immature mind, if he listens to the ritualistic Smrutis, dharma
would develop. Later, after becoming firm in his observance of
dharma, if he listens to scriptures that explain upãsanã, then all
three – gnãn, bhakti and vairãgya – would develop. So, these are the
factors which lead to the development of the four virtues.”
|| Vachanãmrut Loyã-9 || 117 ||

Loyã-10
Remaining Uninfatuated
1

On the morning of Mãgshar sudi 8, Samvat 1877 [13 December
1820], Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot in Surã
Khãchar’s darbãr in Loyã. He was wearing a white dagli made of
chhint and a white survãl. He had also tied a white feto around His
head. At that time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees from
various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Nityãnand Swãmi said, “In this world, there are
some men who have such affection for women and other objects that
if they were to be separated, they would not be able to live. There are
others who also have affection for women and other objects, but it is
not as intense. Hence, if they were to be separated, they would
survive. Thus, there are two types of people. Now, if the former
affectionate person who involves himself in worldly life with affection
were to meet God, he would become attached to God in the same way;
i.e., if he were to be separated from God, he would not be able to
survive. Moreover, if the latter person with less intense affection for
worldly life were to meet God, he would have less intense affection for
God as well. Granted this, is the difference between these two types
of people due to karmas, or is it eternal?”

3

Hearing this, Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “Those differences are not
inherently present in the jiva; instead, they arise as a result of
karmas. How does this happen? Well, when a jiva performs a
karma, the force of its vruttis can be of three levels: mild,
The Vachanãmrut

274

intermediate and intense. The force with which the vruttis attach
themselves to the object determines the effect of the karma upon the
jiva. As a result, three levels of affection arise due to these karmas.”
4

Again, Nityãnand Swãmi asked, “Granted that fact, do the three
levels in the force of the vruttis occur as a result of the gunas, or is
there some other reason?”

5

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “The three types of differences are not
due to the gunas; rather, when only the indriyas indulge in an object,
then a mild force results. When the indriyas indulge in an object
along with the mind, an intermediate level of force develops. When
all three – the indriyas, the mind and the jiva – combine and indulge
in an object, then the vruttis develop an intense force. Even if that
intense force affects only the eyes, the other indriyas would follow,
and the force would affect them as well. In this way, whichever
indriya is primarily affected by the intense force, the other indriyas
follow. Moreover, that intense force affects all three types of people,
rãjasik, sãttvik and tãmasik. In fact, such intense force is present in
each of the indriyas; thus, affection for objects arises
correspondingly.”

6

Then Nityãnand Swãmi asked, “Why does he not develop
affection for God with such an intense force?”

7

Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Good and bad behaviour is determined by
the factors of place, time, action, meditation, scriptures, initiation,
mantra and company. So, if one attains favourable places, times,
company, etc., then one develops affection for God quickly. But if one
encounters unfavourable places, times, etc., then one would develop
affection for objects other than God.”

8

Thereafter, Chaitanyãnand Swãmi asked, “What should one do
in adverse times?”

9

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “Whenever and wherever times are
adverse, one should abandon that place for another location; that is,
one should not stay where the factor of time is adverse. In fact, time,
in the form of Satya-yug, Tretã-yug, Dwãpar-yug and Kali-yug, exists
both externally and internally. So, when Kali-yug is prevalent
within one’s heart, one should not visualise the form of God within
one’s heart; instead, it should be seen externally, before one’s eyes.”

The Vachanãmrut

275

10

Then Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “How can one distinguish
whether a mild, an intermediate or an intense force prevails within
someone’s heart?”

11

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “When the force is mild, one would
harbour the same feelings on seeing a young girl, a young woman or
an old woman. Why? Because only the vruttis of the indriyas have
become involved. Consequently, a mild force has developed. When
the mind unites with the indriyas and they see the three types of
women, then no base thoughts arise towards the young girl or the old
woman; but base thoughts certainly do arise towards the young
woman, and disturbance is experienced. This should be known to be
an intermediate-level force. But, when both the mind and the jiva
combine with the indriyas and look at the three types of women, then
base thoughts arise towards all three types of women, and
disturbance is experienced. In fact, one would experience such base
thoughts even on seeing one’s own mother or sister. This should be
known as an intense force.”

12

Then Brahmãnand Swãmi asked, “Suppose a person notices the
distinction between the three types of women, and notices their
beauty and ugliness, yet he does not experience any base thoughts –
which type of force is that?”

13

Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Having realised an object to be the cause of
intense misery and having contemplated upon that fact, one
attributes grave drawbacks to that object. The contemplation of
those drawbacks in the mind then leads to those drawbacks being
acknowledged by the jiva. The witnessi , who transcends the jiva,
also affirms those drawbacks, and so an extremely firm conviction in
those drawbacks is developed. Thus, when the vruttis of the indriyas
enter the object, the mind and jiva also go along with the vruttis; but
since the jiva’s deep conviction of the drawbacks in the object pierces
the mind and indriyas, even though the object is seen and fully
recognised, still an intense aversion arises for it. For example, if a
snake’s venom is dropped in a bowl of sweet milk, and one sees the
venom being added, then even though the milk appears exactly as
before, an intense aversion for it prevails in one’s heart. Why is
that? Because one has realised, ‘If I drink the milk, I will die.’
i Here ‘witness’ refers to God.

The Vachanãmrut

276

Similarly, such a person has realised, ‘This beautiful woman is an
obstacle on the path of liberation; and she is the cause of extreme
misery in this realm and in the higher realms. In fact, I have
attained the company of women countless times in past lives in
various life forms, and if I do not worship God, I will attain the
company of countless more females. Thus, this attainment is not
rare. However, the company of God and His Sant is extremely rare,
and this woman is a major obstacle in the attainment of that.’ A
person who has realised this and has intensely realised the flaws in
the object will never be infatuated on seeing a woman, regardless of
how beautiful she may be.
14

“Furthermore, there is another way to remain uninfatuated:
Janak the Videhi, who was a great king and a devotee of God, stayed
in his kingdom and, due to his firmness in gnãn, remained
uninfatuated even while indulging in enticing vishays. Similarly, a
devotee with gnãn like Janak, harbours the thought, ‘I am the
ãtmã – pure, chetan, unchanging, the embodiment of bliss, and
imperishable. Vishays like women and other things, however, are
full of misery; they are vain, perishable, and jad.’ With this thought,
he believes only his own self, the ãtmã, as being the embodiment of
bliss. Also, he believes, ‘The pleasure and pleasantness which are
apparent in the vishays – i.e., sounds, touch, etc. – are only
experienced due to the ãtmã. But, when the ãtmã leaves the body,
that which was once pleasurable becomes miserable.’
He
contemplates upon his ãtmã in this manner.

15

“Also, he contemplates upon Paramãtmã, who transcends the
ãtmã, as follows: ‘I have attained this gnãn of the pure ãtmã, which
transcends mãyã, by the grace of the Sant. That Sant is a devotee of
God. Moreover, that God is the ãtmã of even Brahma, who is the
ãtmã of all. He is the ãtmã of Akshar and is also the ãtmã of the
countless millions of muktas. I am the brahmarup servant of that
Parabrahma Purushottam Nãrãyan.’

16

“Further, he understands the greatness of God by realising
‘lÍ¬Ãÿ ∞fl Ã Ÿ ÿÿÈ⁄UãÃ◊ŸãÃÃÿÊ àfl◊Á¬...H’i . Such verses have greatly
i Dyupataya eva te na yayur-antam-anantatayã tvamapi…||

Even the masters of the higher realms [i.e. deities such as Brahmã] cannot
fathom your greatness – because it is endless. [In fact,] neither can you yourself

The Vachanãmrut

277

expounded the greatness of God. When a person who has such gnãn
of his own self and of God attains a vishay, regardless of how
appealing it may be, his mind would not be even slightly affected by
it. He does indulge in the essential vishays, i.e., sounds, touch, etc.,
but he does not become dependent upon them; rather, he indulges in
them independently, of his own accord. Just as a spider spreads its
own web and then, when necessary, it independently retracts it, in
the same way, such a devotee possessing gnãn engages the vruttis of
his indriyas in the vishays and retracts them of his own accord.
Such a person, even if he is amongst people, feels as if he is in the
forest; and though he may be in the forest, he experiences more
happiness there than one does from ruling a kingdom.
17

“Such a devotee may reside in a kingdom, thousands of people
may be under his command and he may be wealthy. But he himself
does not feel, ‘I have become very great.’ Furthermore, if the
kingdom is destroyed and he begs for food from house to house with
an earthen begging-bowl, he does not feel, ‘Now I have become poor.’
This is because he remains absolutely carefree in his own bliss, and
he knows the greatness of his own self and that of God. Thus, he
views gold, dirt, iron and stones as equal; he also feels equanimity in
honour and insult. Since his vision has become broad, and he knows
all worldly objects to be vain, no objects are capable of binding such a
person with gnãn. For example, when a man who was initially poor
receives a kingdom, his vision becomes broad. At first he may have
been selling bundles of wood or doing various other insignificant jobs,
but he forgets them all and he begins to do important tasks related to
his kingdom. Similarly, to such a person with gnãn, all objects
become vain, and due to that gnãn, his vision becomes broad. A
person with such an understanding becomes happy.

18

“Also, if a person has faith, i.e., he believes, ‘Whatever such a
great Sant and God say is the truth; there is no doubt in it,’ and with
such a belief, he does as God and His Sant instruct him to do, then
[fathom your own greatness]. Indeed, in your each and every hair countless
brahmãnds accompanied with their barriers fly simultaneously at immense
speed – like mere specks of dust flying in the air. Even the Shrutis describing
you as ‘neti neti’ [i.e. indescribable and unfathomable] ultimately perish in you
[i.e. fail to extol your complete glory].
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 10.87.41

The Vachanãmrut

278

such a person remains happy. So, these two types of people are
happy, and apart from them, others are not happy. Thus the verse:

ÿp ◊Í…UÃ◊Ù ‹Ù∑§ ÿp ’Èh— ¬⁄¢ ªÃ—–
ÃÊflÈ÷ı ‚Èπ◊œÃ ÁÄ‹‡ÿàÿãÃÁ⁄UÃÙ ¡Ÿ—H i
Also, in the Bhagwad Gitã, it is said:

Áfl·ÿÊ ÁflÁŸflÃ¸ãÃ ÁŸ⁄UÊ„UÊ⁄USÿ ŒÁ „UŸ—–
⁄U‚fl¡Z ⁄U‚Ù˘åÿSÿ ¬⁄¢ ŒÎCÔU˜flÊ ÁŸflÃ¸ÃH ii
So, all objects, except God, become vain to a person whose vision
becomes divine in this way. Moreover, the meaning of these two
verses is the same.”
19

Then Muktãnand Swãmi requested Shriji Mahãrãj, “Mahãrãj,
now please ask the question You were going to ask.”

20

So Shriji Mahãrãj asked, “Is there only misery in mãyã, or is
there also some happiness in it? That is the question.”

21
22

Muktãnand Swãmi replied, “Mãyã causes only misery.”
Thereupon, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Of the three gunas –
sattvagun, rajogun and tamogun – which arise from mãyã,

i Yash-cha moodhatamo loke yash-cha buddhehe param gataha|

Tãvubhau sukham-edhete klishyatyantarito janaha||
In this world, there are two types of people who experience [the] bliss [of God] –
those who are utterly ignorant [and have blind faith in God] and those who are
perfectly enlightened [and have realised God]. Those who are in between,
though, are troubled.
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 3.7.17
ii Vishayã vinivartante nirãhãrasya dehinaha|
Rasa-varjam raso’pyasya param drushtvã nivartate||
The sense objects recede for a person who abstains from indulging in them.
However, the longing for them does not subside. The longing subsides [only]
when his vision reaches [i.e. he realises] the transcendental [i.e. God].
Bhagwad Gitã: 2.59

The Vachanãmrut

279

sattvagun is said to give happiness. Furthermore, in the Shrimad
Bhãgwat it is said, ‘‚?fl¢ ÿµrÊÔŒ‡Ê¸Ÿ◊˜’i and that the products of
sattvagun are gnãn, vairãgya, wisdom, tranquillity, self-restraint,
etc. How is mãyã in this form a cause of misery? Furthermore, it is
stated in the 11th canto:

ÁfllÊÁfll ◊◊ ÃŸÍ ÁflhKÈhfl ‡Ê⁄UËÁ⁄UáÊÊ◊˜–
◊ÙˇÊ’ãœ∑§⁄UË •Êl ◊ÊÿÿÊ ◊ ÁflÁŸÁ◊¸ÃH ii
So, how is mãyã in the form of knowledge which leads to liberation a
cause of misery?”
23

Hearing this question, Muktãnand Swãmi and all of the other
paramhansas said, “Mahãrãj, we are unable to answer, so please
have mercy and give the answer Yourself.”

24

Hearing this, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “To a sinful person, the form
of Yamarãjã appears frightful and terrible, with large teeth and a
large, frightening mouth; he appears black like soot, huge like a
mountain and horrific like death. In this way, his form appears
dreadful. But to a virtuous person, the form of Yamarãjã appears
very pleasant, like Vishnu. Similarly, to those who are non-believers,
mãyã causes attachment and intense misery, while to a devotee of
God, that same mãyã is the cause of intense happiness. Also, the
entities that have evolved out of mãyã – the indriyas and the
antahkaran, and their presiding deities – all support the bhakti of
God. Therefore, for a devotee of God, mãyã is not a cause of misery;
it is a source of great happiness.”

25

Then Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “If mãyã is a cause of
happiness, why is it that when a devotee of God visualises the form of

i Sattvam yad-brahma-darshanam

Sattvagun leads to the vision [i.e. realisation] of Brahma [i.e. God].
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 1.2.24
ii Vidyãvidye mama tanoo viddhyuddhava shareerinãm|
Bandha-mokshakari ãdye mãyayã me vinirmite||
O Uddhava! Realise my two forms – both of which have been created from my
mãyã: the primordial [brahma]vidyã and avidyã, which liberate and bind people
[respectively].
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 11.11.3

The Vachanãmrut

280

God and engages in worship, mãyã, in the form of the antahkaran,
causes misery by generating many disturbing thoughts?”
26

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “Mãyã, in the form of the antahkaran,
does not cause misery to a person who thoroughly understands the
greatness of God and has an absolutely firm refuge of God; but it does
cause misery to a person who does not have such a refuge. For
example, a kusangi would attempt to dislodge only an irresolute
satsangi, but no one would dare to dislodge a staunch satsangi. In
fact, no one would be able to speak ill of Satsang in his presence.
Similarly, mãyã, in the form of the antahkaran, would never
entertain a desire to daunt a person who has a firm refuge in God.
Rather, it would help his bhakti to flourish. However, mãyã does
deflect a person who has a slight deficiency in his refuge in God and
does cause him misery. Then, when that person develops a complete
refuge in God, mãyã is not able to disturb him or cause him pain.
Therefore, the answer is that if a person has such complete faith in
God, mãyã is not capable of causing him misery.”
|| Vachanãmrut Loyã-10 || 118 ||

Loyã-11
Beliefs of a Holy and Unholy Person
1

On the morning of Mãgshar vadi 8, Samvat 1877 [27 December
1820], Swãmi Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting in Surã
Khãchar’s darbãr in Loyã. He was dressed entirely in white clothes.
At that time, an assembly of sãdhus as well as devotees from various
places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shuk Muni asked Shriji Mahãrãj, “What
understanding does an unholy person adopt from the Shrimad
Bhãgwat, the Bhagwad Gitã, and other sacred scriptures?”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “The answer is as follows: An unholy
person believes that all of the mobile and immobile male and female
forms in this world have been created through mãyã and the
primordial Purush, Virãt, the form of God. This implies that all of
these forms are, in fact, manifestations of God Himself. For this
reason, a person aspiring for liberation should initially conquer his
mind, and thereafter, if his mind is attracted towards a higher or
lower form of either a male or a female, he should meditate on that
The Vachanãmrut

281

very form in order to attain instantaneous samãdhi. If the mind
perceives any flaws in that form, then he should believe that form to
be Brahma by thinking, ‘The whole world is Brahma.’ Thinking in
this manner, he should refute the perception of those flaws. In this
way, to accept only the transcendental words regarding experiences
from the scriptures is the understanding of an unholy person. Such
a misunderstanding reflects the wicked nature of his mind, and, at
the end of one’s life, its result is consignment to the deep, dismal
regions of narak and the cycle of births and deaths.”
4

Thereafter, Shuk Muni requested, “Now please explain what
understanding a holy person adopts from the sacred scriptures.”

5

Shriji Mahãrãj answered, “The answer to this question is given
in the sacred scriptures themselves. Specifically, those desiring
liberation should not meditate on – with the exception of
Purushottam Nãrãyan – any deities such as Shiv, Brahmã, etc.
Instead, among all humans and deities, they should meditate only on
the forms of Rãm, Krishna, etc. that are forms of Purushottam
Nãrãyan. Furthermore, the wise among them consider all of the
places where God’s forms of Rãm, Krishna, etc., reside to be
Vaikunth, Golok, Shwetdwip and Brahmapur. They consider the
attendants that dwell in those realms to be the attendants of Rãm,
Krishna, etc., i.e., Hanumãn, Uddhav, etc. They also regard the
divine forms of Purushottam Nãrãyan in those realms, which are
radiant with the light of countless millions of suns, moons and flames
of fire, to be the forms of Rãm, Krishna, etc. So, one who adopts such
an understanding from the sacred scriptures and with a sense of
divinity meditates on the forms of God that are in human form, never
equates the forms of God’s avatãrs and other forms. In reality, all
forms of God’s avatãrs have only two arms. However, for the sole
reason of dismissing any similarity that a person lacking wisdom
may perceive between God’s form and other forms, they are often
described as having four arms or eight arms.

6

“Moreover, one should only meditate on the form of God that one
has attained, not on the forms of the previous avatãrs. Thus, like a
woman who observes the vow of fidelity, one should remain totally
faithful to the form of God that one has attained. Pãrvati has also
said:

The Vachanãmrut

282

∑§ÙÁ≈U ¡ã◊‹ª ⁄Uª«U „U◊Ê⁄UË–
flL¢§ ‡Ê÷È ∑§ ⁄U „È¢U ∑È§◊Ê⁄UËH i
Such a vow of fidelity has also been mentioned in order to dismiss the
similarity that a person lacking wisdom perceives between the form
of God and other beings. This is because if someone strays from the
form of God which one has attained, and instead, meditates on the
previous avatãrs of that very God, then later he may even forsake
God and meditate on other deities or other human forms. That is
why the vow of fidelity has been mentioned, not because there is any
difference between the forms of God themselves.
This is the
understanding of a holy person. Therefore, one should only hear the
sacred scriptures from a holy person, but never from an unholy
person.”
|| Vachanãmrut Loyã-11 || 119 ||

Loya-12
The Six Levels of Faith; Savikalp and Nirvikalp Faith
1

On the night of Mãgshar vadi 9, Samvat 1877 [28 December
1820], Swãmi Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting in Surã
Khãchar's darbãr in Loyã. He was dressed entirely in white clothes
and was also wearing a red, woollen dagli. At that time, an assembly
of paramhansas as well as devotees from various places had gathered
before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj raised a question: “Faith in God is of
two types: one is ‘savikalp faith’, and the other is ‘nirvikalp faith’. In
each type of faith there are three sub-categories: the highest level, the
intermediate level, and the lowest level. Please describe, in turn, the
distinguishing characteristics of each of these six categories.”

3

The paramhansas were unable to answer, so Shriji Mahãrãj
said, “The characteristics of a person with the lowest level of
‘savikalp faith’ are as follows: As long as God exhibits lust, anger,
i Koti janma-laga ragad hamãri|

Varu Shambhu, ke rahu kumãri||
For a million lives I have fared;
I’ll marry Shambhu, or remain unwed.

The Vachanãmrut

283

avarice, egotism, cravings for taste, etc., to the same extent as other
humans, the person’s faith in God remains. But if God were to
display these swabhãvs more so than others, his faith would be
shattered.
4

“The faith of someone with an intermediate level of ‘savikalp
faith’ remains firm even if God exhibits lust, anger, etc., to a double
degree than that of humans.

5

“Finally, one with the highest level of ‘savikalp faith’ would
never doubt any action of God, even if God were to behave coarsely
like a person of a low caste; or exhibit anger, violence, etc.; or indulge
in drinking alcohol, meat-eating or adultery. Why? Because he
understands God to be the all-doer, the supreme lord, and the
experiencer of everything. Such a person realises that whatever
actions take place in the world are the result of God, who is anvay
within all beings as their controller. If, then, He were to indulge in
some degrading deed, it would not affect Him at all since He Himself
is the all-doer. In this manner, one who has realised God as the lord
of all is known as a devotee of God with the highest level of ‘savikalp
faith’.

6

“As for a devotee with the lowest level of ‘nirvikalp faith’, no
matter what pious or impious deeds he witnesses being performed by
God, he understands that in all actions God performs, He is still a
non-doer, since He is Brahma. That Brahma is like ãkãsh in that
everything resides in ãkãsh and all actions take place within it. The
devotee realises such qualities of Brahma in God. For example,
during the narration of the Rãs-panchãdhyãyi, King Parikshit asked
Shukji, ‘God assumes an avatãr to uphold dharma. Why, then, did
he associate with the gopis?’ Shukji replied, ‘Shri Krishna is radiant
like fire; whatever actions he performs, pious or impious, are burnt to
ashes.’ In this manner, one who understands God as Brahma,
unaffected by the actions He performs, is said to have the lowest level
of ‘nirvikalp faith’.

7

“One who becomes like the niranna-muktas of Shwetdwip – who
are free from the six physical and emotional sensations14 – and
worships Vãsudev is said to possess an intermediate level of
‘nirvikalp faith’.

8

“Finally, one possessing the highest level of ‘nirvikalp faith’
realises that countless millions of brahmãnds, each encircled by the
eight barriers5, appear like mere atoms before Akshar. Such is the
The Vachanãmrut

284

greatness of Akshar, the abode of Purushottam Nãrãyan. One who
worships Purushottam realising oneself to be aksharrup can be said
to possess the highest level of ‘nirvikalp faith’.”
9

Thereafter Chaitanyãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, how have
such distinctions in faith arisen?”

10

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “When an aspirant initially approaches a
guru, several factors cause distinctions in his faith: the
auspiciousness and inauspiciousness of place, time, company,
initiation, action, mantra, scriptures, etc.1, with regards to the guru;
as well as the intensity of one’s own shraddhã. Therefore, one should
always associate with favourable places, times, etc. Moreover, one
should acquire wisdom from a speaker who is serene and faultless.

11

Chaitanyãnand Swãmi asked further, “If under such
circumstances one develops the lowest level of faith, can it later
develop into the highest level of faith?”

12

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “If the listener possesses extreme
shraddhã; and if he encounters favourable places, times, etc.; and if
he encounters a guru with the highest level of gnãn, then the highest
level of faith will develop. Otherwise, such faith would develop after
many lives.”
|| Vachanãmrut Loyã-12 || 120 ||

Loyã-13
Not Being Overcome by Adverse Circumstances
1

In the early morning of Mãgshar vadi 10, Samvat 1877 [30
December 1820], Swãmi Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a
large, decorated cot in Surã Khãchar’s darbãr in Loyã. He had worn
a red, woollen dagli and a white khes. He had tied a white feto
around His head and had tied a bokãni with another white feto. In
addition to this, He had covered Himself with a thick, white cotton
cloth. At that time, an assembly of paramhansas as well as devotees
from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Shriji Mahãrãj then told the senior paramhansas to ask
questions amongst themselves. Thereupon Gopãlãnand Swãmi asked
Brahmãnand Swãmi, “What type of person is not overcome by
adverse places, times, actions, company, etc.; and what type of person
is overcome? After all, it is said that even Brahmã was infatuated
The Vachanãmrut

285

upon seeing Saraswati, as was Shiv when he saw Mohini. So please
answer carefully, because even such greats have been overcome by
adverse circumstances.”
3

Brahmãnand Swãmi attempted to answer but could not give a
satisfactory reply.

4

So Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “A person who has withdrawn his
nãdis and prãns, and by way of his nirvikalp state remains at the
holy feet of God, would not be overcome by adverse places, times,
company, etc., even if he was an insignificant being. In fact, if
Brahmã and the other deities behave in this manner, they would also
not be overcome. However, if he has not developed such a state, and
instead, behaves as if he is the body, then average beings as well as
greats such as Brahmã and the other deities would be overcome. If
this were not so, then the meaning of the verse:

Ãà‚ÎCÔU‚ÎCÔU‚ÎCÔU·È ∑§Ù ãflπÁá«UÃœË— ¬È◊ÊŸ˜–
´§Á·¢ ŸÊ⁄UÊÿáÊ◊ÎÃ ÿÙÁ·ã◊ƒÿ„U ◊ÊÿÿÊH i
would not hold true. Therefore, God alone is not overcome by those
influences. While all others, however great they may be, if they are
not engrossed in the holy feet of God, would be overcome; those who
do remain engrossed are not overcome. This is a universal principle
that I have firmly established within Myself.
5

“Moreover, it is mentioned in the Shrimad Bhãgwat:

∞ÃŒË‡ÊŸ◊Ë‡ÊSÿ ¬˝∑Î§ÁÃSÕÙ˘Á¬ ÃeÈáÊÒ—–
Ÿ ÿÈÖÿÃ ‚ŒÊà◊SÕÒÿ¸ÕÊ ’ÈÁhSÃŒÊüÊÿÊH ii
i Tat-shrushta-shrushta-shrushteshu ko nvakhandita-dheehee pumãn|

Rushim nãrãyanam-rute yoshin-mayyeha mãyayã||
Of the progeny of Brahmã [i.e. Marichi, etc.], and their progeny [i.e. Kashyap,
etc.], and their progeny [i.e. humans and deities] – whose mind in this world,
besides that of Nãrãyan Rishi, can be distinguished as being unaffected by the
mãyã [i.e. alluring charm] of women?
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 3.31.37
ii Etad-eeshanam-eeshasya prakrutistho’pi tad -gunaihee|
Na yujyate sadãtmasthair-yathã buddhis-tad-ãshrayã||
Just as a person’s buddhi [i.e. knowledge of God] is not affected by the traits of
the body [such as birth, death, age, illness, ignorance, etc.], similarly, God, who

The Vachanãmrut

286

6

“Krishna Bhagwãn has also said:

ŒÒflË sÔ·Ê ªÈáÊ◊ÿË ◊◊ ◊ÊÿÊ ŒÈ⁄UàÿÿÊ–
◊Ê◊fl ÿ ¬˝¬lãÃ ◊ÊÿÊ◊ÃÊ¢ Ã⁄UÁãÃ ÃH i
7

“Thus, only God remains unaffected by mãyã; and one who has
realised God through a nirvikalp state is also not overcome by mãyã.
On the other hand, someone who has realised God through a savikalp
state, however great he may be, would still be overcome.”

8

Thereafter, Nityãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, as long as a
mukta is associated with the gunas, he is affected by places, times,
etc. It is accepted, however, that God is not influenced by places,
times, etc. – even while He remains within the gunas. But when all
of the muktas are free from the association of the gunas, and having
become nirgun, dwell in Akshardhãm along with God – who dwells
there in the same manner – then all of the muktas are nirgun and
composed of chaitanya. Also, as explained by ‘◊◊ ‚ÊäÊêÿ¸◊ÊªÃÊ—’ii , they
have attained qualities similar to those of God. How, then, should we
understand the distinction between the muktas and God?”

9

Shriji Mahãrãj answered, “Look at the moon and the stars. Isn’t
there a difference between the two? They are not similar in terms of
brightness, and there is a vast difference between the intensity of
their rays as well. All of the herbs are nourished by the moon, but
not by the stars. Also, it is the moon that dispels the darkness of the
night, not the stars. God and the muktas differ in the same way.

10

“Also, a king and his servant are both the same in that both are
humans; yet the authority, power, beauty and charm of the king are
pervades Prakruti [and its creation], is forever unaffected by their influences
and the influences of the ãtmãs. This is the prowess of God.
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 1.11.38
i Daivee hyeshã guna-mayee mama mãyã duratyayã|
Mãm-eva ye prapadyante mãyãm-etãm taranti te||
My mãyã, which I have created and is composed of the [three] gunas, is indeed
difficult to transcend. [But] those who take refuge in me alone can transcend
that mãyã.
Bhagwad Gitã: 7.14
ii mama sãdharmyam-ãgatãhã
Bhagwad Gitã: 14.2

The Vachanãmrut

287

by far superior. His servant, regardless of how great he may be,
cannot achieve what the king can achieve. In the same way,
Purushottam Nãrãyan is the all-doer, the cause of all, the controller
of all; He is extremely attractive, extremely radiant, and extremely
powerful; also, He possesses the kartum, akartum and anyathãkartum powers. If He wishes, He can eclipse all of the muktas of
Akshardhãm by His own divine light and prevail alone. Also, if He
wishes, He can accept the bhakti of the muktas and reside with
them. He can eclipse even Akshar, in the form of the Akshardhãm
in which He dwells, and preside alone independently. If He so
chooses, He is capable of supporting the countless muktas by His own
power, without even needing Akshardhãm. For example, King
Pruthu had told Pruthvi, ‘I can kill you with the arrow from my bow
and still be able to support the whole world by my powers.’ Likewise,
through His powers, God reigns as supreme. He who equates God
with Akshar and the other muktas should be regarded as evil-minded
and as a grave sinner. One should avoid even looking at him. In
fact, merely looking at such a person is as sinful as committing the
five grave sins10.
11

“Of course, by considering their association with God, it is
acceptable to endow greatness upon anyone. Brahmã, Shiv, Nãrad,
the Sanakãdik and Uddhav can all be called God because of their
association with God. At present, even a sãdhu like Muktãnand
Swãmi can be considered to be like God because of his association
with God. Without God, however, even Akshar cannot be called
God – let alone anyone else. In fact, the Vedstuti prose ‘•¬Á⁄UÁ◊ÃÊ

œ˝ÈflÊSÃŸÈ÷ÎÃÙ ÿÁŒ ‚fl¸ªÃÊSÃÁ„¸U Ÿ ‡ÊÊSÿÃÁÃ ÁŸÿ◊Ù œ˝Èfl ŸÃ⁄UÕÊ–’i reflects the

same truth. If this were not so, then why would we, despite
regarding ourselves to be brahmarup, and distinct from the body, and
possessing gnãn, vairãgya, etc., try to please God by staying up day
and night, clapping, singing devotional songs and chanting His holy

i

Aparimitã dhruvãs-tanubhruto yadi sarvagatãs-tarhi na shãsyateti niyamo
dhruva netarathã|
O Steadfast [God]! If the embodied jivas, which are innumerable and eternal, are
believed to be all-pervasive, then they would not be governable. [But] not
believing them as such [i.e. all-pervasive] would not cause any discrepancies.
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 10.87.30

The Vachanãmrut

288

name tirelessly? Why would we engage in spiritual discourses day
and night and encourage others to do so as well? Why would we
make so much effort if we could become like God? Hence, only God is
like God; no one can become like Him. The Vedic verse ‘∞∑§◊flÊÁmÃËÿ¢

’˝rÊÔ’i also explains that God alone is like God. This is the principle of
all of the scriptures.”
12

In this manner, Shriji Mahãrãj addressed the devotees for their
benefit, when in reality He Himself is Purushottam Nãrãyan.
|| Vachanãmrut Loyã-13 || 121 ||

Loyã-14
Personal Preferences
1

On Mãgshar vadi 11, Samvat 1877 [31 December 1820], Shriji
Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot in Surã Khãchar’s
darbãr in Loyã. He was wearing a white khes and had tied a white
feto around His head. He had covered Himself with a white cotton
cloth. At that time, an assembly of paramhansas as well as devotees
from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Then Shriji Mahãrãj said to the paramhansas, “All of the
ãchãryas of the past have had differing beliefs. Of them, Shankar
Swãmi seems to have leaned predominantly towards the Advait
doctrine. Rãmãnuj’s principle is that jivas, mãyã and Purushottam
are eternal; Purushottam is the controller of the jivas and mãyã; He
is the ultimate cause of all; He forever dwells in His Akshardhãm in
a divine form; all avatãrs emanate from Him; and it is this
Purushottam Nãrãyan that individuals should worship. This seems
to be the understanding of Rãmãnuj. Vallabhãchãrya seems to have
intense faith only in bhakti. All of these ãchãryas have occasionally
referred to other principles in their own scriptures, but ultimately, in
one way or another, they have leaned towards their own personal
preference.
Their views can be accurately inferred from the
statements in their scriptures.

i Ekam-evãdviteeyam brahma

Chhãndogya Upanishad: 6.2.1

The Vachanãmrut

289

3

“In the same way, having listened to My discourses, what have
all of you realised My personal preference to be? Just as a thread
passes through the eye of a needle, or a thread runs through each
and every bead of a rosary, which principle is consistently interwoven
in all of My talks? Please state your beliefs.”

4

Thereupon all of the senior paramhansas spoke according to
their understanding.

5

Then, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Here, allow Me to reveal My own
principles and preferences.

6

“First of all, I like the fact that although Rushabhdev Bhagwãn
had attained oneness with Vãsudev, and despite being God himself,
when yogic powers manifested before him, he did not accept them
because he wished to set an example for all renunciants. Also, the
Shrimad Bhãgwat states: ‘Even an accomplished yogi should never
trust his mind – even though he may appear to have conquered it.’
There are verses to that effect as well:

Ÿ ∑È§ÿÊ¸à∑§Á„¸UÁøà‚Åÿ¢ ◊ŸÁ‚ sŸflÁSÕÃ–
ÿÁmüÊê÷ÊÁëø⁄UÊìÊËáÊZ øS∑§ãŒ Ã¬ ∞E⁄U◊˜H i
ÁŸàÿ¢ ŒŒÊÁÃ ∑§Ê◊SÿÁë¿Uº˝¢ Ã◊ŸÈ ÿ˘⁄Uÿ—–
ÿÙÁªŸ— ∑Î§Ã◊ÒòÊSÿ ¬àÿÈ¡Ê¸ÿfl ¬È¢p‹ËH ii
In this manner, I like a renunciant who does not trust his mind.

i Na kuryãt-karhichit-sakhyam manasi hyanavasthite|

Yad-vishrambhãch-chirãch-cheernam chaskanda tapa aishvaram||
Never befriend the mind [because] it is very unstable; it has even destroyed the
austerities of the deities that were accumulated after extensive endeavours over
a great period of time.
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 5.6.3
ii Nityam dadãti kãmasyach-chhidram tam-anu ye’rayaha|
Yoginihi kruta-maitrasya patyur-jãyeva punshchalee||
The minds of those yogis who have befriended their minds continuously allow
lust to enter. [Other] enemies [such as anger, avarice, infatuation, etc.] follow
that lust [into the mind. In this way, the mind brings about the downfall] of the
yogis – just as an unfaithful wife [brings about the downfall] of her trusting
husband.
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 5.6.4

The Vachanãmrut

290

7

“Also, in My mind I do not like other realms as much as I like
Shwetdwip and Badrikãshram. In fact, I feel that it would be very
good to go there to perform austerities without any food. I would
prefer not to indulge in the various types of pleasures of the other
realms.”

8

“Furthermore, I realise that the many avatãrs are all ultimately
of God; yet, among these avatãrs, I like Rushabhdevji greatly. I also
like Kapilji and Dattãtreya equally, but to a lesser extent than
Rushabhdevji. But more than these three, I have a million-fold more
affection for the avatãr of Shri Krishna. I feel, ‘This avatãr is greater
and more powerful than all of the others. Also, in him, one cannot
make the distinction of the avatãr and the source of the avatãr.’ On
the other hand, I do not have a great liking for the other avatãrs of
God such as Matsya, Kachchha, etc.

9

“In addition to this, My understanding is as follows: There is an
all-transcending mass of divine light which cannot be measured from
above, below, or in any of the four directions; that is to say, it is
endless. Amidst this mass of light lies a large, ornate throne upon
which presides the divine form of Shri Nãrãyan Purushottam
Bhagwãn. Countless millions of muktas are seated around that
throne and enjoy the darshan of God. I constantly see Him
accompanied by the muktas. Moreover, that God is extremely
luminous. At times when, due to this luminosity, I cannot see God
with the assembly of muktas, I feel deeply hurt. Despite being able to
constantly see this mass of divine light, I am not attracted by it; I
experience profound bliss only from the darshan of God’s form. This
is My method of worship.

10

“Moreover, I like the bhakti that the gopis had towards God. For
this reason, I continuously observe people, and having seen the
affection a lustful woman has for a man, or a lustful man has for a
woman, I feel, ‘It would be good to have such affection for God.’ Also,
whenever I see someone having great affection for their son, or their
money, I again feel, ‘It would be good to have such affection towards
God.’ That is why whenever I hear someone singing, I would either
send someone to that person, or I would personally go there, and I
would feel, ‘What he is doing is very good.’

11

“Also, I only get along with one who has no swabhãvs, i.e., lust,
anger, avarice, affection, egotism, jealousy, hypocrisy, deceit,
cravings for taste, etc.; one who observes dharma as prescribed in the
The Vachanãmrut

291

Dharma-shãstras; and one who has bhakti towards God. I enjoy the
company of only such a person. If a person is not like that, then I do
not get along with him, even if he is staying close to Me. In fact, I
feel an aversion towards him.
12

“Initially I had a strong dislike for anyone with lust. However,
now I have a strong dislike for those who have anger, egotism or
jealousy. The reason is that a lustful person passes his days in the
Satsang fellowship by being meek – like a householder devotee; but as
for those who have anger, egotism or jealousy, they can be seen to
definitely regress in Satsang. For this reason, I am deeply saddened
by these types of people.

13

“What is egotism like? Well, a person with egotism remains
arrogant even before those who are superior to him, but he cannot
become humble and serve them.

14

“Now allow Me to summarise My preferences in brief. I do not
agree with Shankar Swãmi’s propagation of the non-dual Brahma.
Rãmãnuj Swãmi describes Purushottam Bhagwãn as transcending
the perishable and the imperishable, and I worship that
Purushottam Bhagwãn.
My bhakti towards that Purushottam
Bhagwãn is like that of the gopis, and the virtues of vairãgya and
ãtmã-realisation within Me are like Shukji’s and Jadbharat’s. These
are My principles and preferences. The intelligent can realise this if
they analyse My talks as well as the scriptures of our sampradãy
which have been accepted by Me as authoritative.”

15

Thus, Shriji Mahãrãj spoke for the sake of His devotees, while
He Himself is Purushottam Nãrãyan.
|| Vachanãmrut Loyã-14 || 122 ||

Loyã-15
Explaining Ãtmadarshan Using
the Analogies of a Doll and a Cow
1

On the night of Mãgshar vadi 13, Samvat 1877 [2 January
1821], Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting in Surã Khãchar’s darbãr in Loyã.
He was wearing a warm, red dagli and a white khes. He had tied a
white feto around His head and had tied a bokãni with another white
feto. In addition to this, He had covered Himself with a thick, cotton
cloth that had been placed together with a white blanket. At that
The Vachanãmrut

292

time, an assembly of devotees from various places as well as
paramhansas had gathered before Him.
2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said out of compassion, “The jiva
pervades the entire body from head to toe through its three powers of
adhyãtma, adhibhut and adhidev. Through the indriyas and their
presiding deities, it experiences the vishays, but it cannot experience
anything by being distinct from the presiding deities and the
indriyas.”

3

Thereupon Nityãnand Swãmi raised a doubt: “Mahãrãj, it is said
that the jiva pervades the whole body in general, but resides
specifically within the heart. How, then, should one understand the
fact that awareness is not present everywhere equally?”

4

Shriji Mahãrãj answered, “The sun pervades each and every
object equally by its rays, but its light is seen according to the object
before it. For example, pure sunlight is not experienced as intensely
on stone or sand or in dirty water as it is on a floor made of glass or
in clean water. Thus, just as one experiences a greater and lesser
intensity in the sun’s light, in the same way, even though the jiva
resides equally in the indriyas, the antahkaran and the indriyas’
organs, one experiences its power more intensely in the indriyas
because of their purity. Just see, does one experience as much
sensation in one’s nose and ears as one does in one’s eyes? Certainly
not. Furthermore, the four antahkarans are even purer than the
indriyas, and so the jiva’s power can be experienced there even more
intensely. In comparison, it is experienced to a lesser degree in the
indriyas.
Nevertheless, the jiva does pervade the entire body
equally.”

5

Thereafter Brahmãnand Swãmi asked, “Many see the jiva to be
like a star, or like the flame of an oil lamp, or like the flash from a
firecracker.
How should one understand these differences in
experiences?”

6

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “Just as a person who has mastered
akshividyã can see the jiva and the form of God therein with his eyes,
one who has attained realisation through the indriyas sees the ãtmã
in a similar manner. For example, if there were a glass doll shaped
in the form of a human – with all of its limbs, hair and vessels made
of glass – and if it were filled with light, then the light would be seen
only according to the size and shape of the tubes within; it would not
be seen everywhere. In the very same way, people describe the
The Vachanãmrut

293

nature of the jiva according to however they have seen it. But,
because they have not attained transcendent vision, they do not see
the ãtmã as it is. However, when a person’s vision does become
transcendent and one with his ãtmã, he no longer perceives the
divisions of the different organs of the indriyas; instead, he realises
the ãtmã as it truly is. Just as one who has attained the viewpoint of
ãkãsh does not perceive the other four bhuts, similarly, one with
transcendental vision does not perceive differences in the jiva’s light
arising from its indriyas, their organs and presiding deities, and the
antahkaran; instead, he realises the jiva precisely as it is.
Conversely, one who perceives distinctions does not realise the jiva as
it is. For example, from a group of people, someone saw the tail of a
cow, someone else saw its mouth, someone saw its hoof, another saw
its stomach, and yet another saw its udder. Whichever part of the
cow was seen did, in fact, belong to the cow, yet no one saw the cow
completely. But, because at least one part was seen, it can be said
that the cow was actually seen. In the same manner, a person can
be said to have seen the ãtmã to the extent to which he has seen the
light of the ãtmã through his indriyas or antahkaran. This,
however, cannot be said to be perfect ãtmã-realisation. Thus, I
explain the general and the specific experiences of the jiva in this
manner.”
7

At that point, Nityãnand Swãmi questioned, “Mahãrãj, you have
described the jiva as being formless. Therefore, when God dwells
within the jiva, does He reside without a form, or does He possess a
form?”

8

Shriji Mahãrãj clarified, “God dwells as the refuge of the
indriyas, their presiding deities, the antahkaran and the jiva. Shri
Krishna Bhagwãn, for example, made Uddhavji explain to the gopis,
‘I am near to you by being the refuge of your indriyas, antahkaran,
their presiding deities and jiva.
Just as the very same five
mahãbhuts which reside in the brahmãnds are also within
everyone’s body, similarly, I reside in Mathurã like the mahãbhuts
reside predominantly in the brahmãnds; but just like those
mahãbhuts reside subtly in the bodies of the jivas, I also reside
within all of you. The fact that I cannot be seen is to keep the vrutti
of your mind confined within me; that is why I cannot be seen.
Nevertheless, I reside within you possessing a definite form.’”

The Vachanãmrut

294

9

Hearing this, Nityãnand Swãmi questioned further, “But
Mahãrãj, does God, who resides as the refuge of the indriyas etc.,
reside in the form of Purush, Akshar, or as Purushottam Himself?”

10

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “The light of the jiva, Purush, Akshar
and Purushottam is very similar in terms of luminosity. So much
so, that no one is capable of distinguishing between their light.
Actually, though, they are absolutely distinct from each other, but no
one is capable of seeing these distinctions. Only one who receives a
divine body composed of divine light by the grace of God realises,
‘This is myself, this is Purush, this is Akshar, and this is
Purushottam – who is distinct from all.’ In this way, one can see
them separately and their light distinctly. However, no one else is
capable of distinguishing between them. Thus, God may reside in
whichever form He chooses, but it is He Himself who resides within
the jiva – no one else.”

11

Then Shriji Mahãrãj continued, “There are three sets of
scriptures which are eternal and which describe only the form of Shri
Krishna Paramãtmã. They are Yoga, Sãnkhya and Vedãnta, i.e., the
Upanishads. I shall now explain the principles of each, so please
listen.

12

“Those belonging to the Sãnkhya philosophy propound the
existence of 24 elements2 and believe Paramãtmã to transcend them;
that is, Paramãtmã is the 25th element. However, they do not accept
jiva and ishwar as being distinct from the 24 elements. Their
reasoning is that the elements cannot be sustained without the jiva,
and so, the jiva is conceived only as a form of the elements because of
its close co-existence with them. As a result, they do not consider the
jiva to be distinct. Also, just as they regard the jiva as a form of the
elements, they regard the ishwars – who believe the brahmãnds to be
their true form – as a form of the 24 elements. In this manner, they
conceive both jiva and ishwar among the 24 elements, and thus count
them together with the 24 elements; they do not consider them as
being distinct from the elements. So, this, along with believing
Paramãtmã to be the 25th element, is the philosophy of Sãnkhya.

13

“Despite this, one should not conclude that there is no jiva at all,
because the propounders of Sãnkhya have prescribed the six

The Vachanãmrut

295

endeavoursi as well as shravan, manan, nididhyãs, etc., for the jiva.
By endeavouring in this way, the jiva attains a thought that
eventually leads to the realisation of its distinction from the
elements. Then, realising oneself to be brahmarup, one engages in
the worship of God. This is the Sãnkhya philosophy. It is also
mentioned in the Moksh-dharma, where Nãradji explains to
Shukdevji,

àÿ¡ œ◊¸◊œ◊Z ø ©U÷ ‚àÿÊŸÎÃ àÿ¡–
©U÷ ‚àÿÊŸÎÃ àÿQ˜§flÊ ÿŸ àÿ¡Á‚ Ã?ÿ¡H ii
The meaning of this verse is that when a spiritual aspirant prepares
to contemplate upon his ãtmã, he should renounce all thoughts of
dharma and adharma, truth and falsehood that disturb him. In fact,
he should also renounce the thought by which he renounces these
other thoughts. In this way, he should behave as brahmarup.
However, the verse does not suggest that one should physically
forsake the niyams in the form of dharma. This is the correct
interpretation of the verse.
14

“Next, propounders of the Yoga philosophy propagate the 24
elements distinctly from the jiva and ishwar, whom they regard as
the 25th element, and Paramãtmã, as the 26th. With the power of
discernment they distinguish the 25th element from the other
elements, and firmly resolving that to be their form, they gather the
vruttis of the 24 elements and forcefully attach them to the 26th
element – they do not allow them to be drawn towards the vishays.
They believe, ‘If my vruttis forsake God and wander elsewhere, I will
have to pass through the cycle of births and deaths.’ Therefore, they
forcibly keep the vruttis of their indriyas and antahkaran on God.

i The six endeavours, ‘shat-sampatti’, propounded by the Sãnkhya philosophy: (1)

sham – tranquillity, i.e. restraint of mind; (2) dam – self-control, i.e. restraint of
outer sense organs; (3) uparati – abstinence, i.e. refraining from unnecessary,
especially mundane, objects and activities; (4) titkshã – endurance, i.e.
overcoming of comforts and hardships; (5) samãdhãn – stability, i.e. balance of
mind and focus on God; and (6) shraddhã – faith and persistence.
ii Tyaja dharmam-adharmam cha ubhe satyãnrute tyaja|
Ubhe satyãnrute tyaktvã yena tyajasi tat-tyaja||
Mahãbhãrat: Shãnti-parva, Moksh-dharma 33.40

The Vachanãmrut

296

15

“In comparison, the propounders of Sãnkhya believe, ‘I have no
indriyas or antahkaran, so where shall they go?’ Thus, they consider
themselves to be brahmarup and remain fearless. Those belonging to
the Yoga philosophy remain constantly fearful. For example, if a
person had to carry a vessel filled to the brim with oil up some stairs
without spilling any oil at all, and if two swordsmen with drawn
swords were on both sides trying to frighten him, that person would
be extremely fearful. Followers of Yoga remain just as fearful of the
vishays and strive to keep their vrutti fixed on God. This is the
philosophy of Yoga.

16

“Vedãnta, that is, the Upanishads, expound only Purushottam
Nãrãyan Brahma, the ultimate cause of all, as being satya, and
claim all else to be false. Just as when one attains the viewpoint of
ãkãsh one does not perceive the other elements, in the same way, one
who sees only Brahma, perceives nothing else.
That is the
philosophy of Vedãnta.”
|| Vachanãmrut Loyã-15 || 123 ||

Loyã-16
Worldly Desires Becoming Blunt and Uprooted
1

After the evening ãrti on Mãgshar vadi 14, Samvat 1877 [3
January 1821], Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot
in Surã Khãchar’s darbãr in Loyã. He was wearing a white khes
and a warm, red dagli. He had also tied a white feto around His
head and had tied a bokãni with another white feto. At that time, an
assembly of paramhansas as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “May the paramhansas please
engage in a question-answer session.”

3

So saying, He Himself asked a question: “What are the
characteristics of one whose worldly desires have not become blunt,
one whose worldly desires have become blunt, and one whose worldly
desires have been completely uprooted?”

4

Muktãnand Swãmi began to answer the question but could not
reply satisfactorily.

5

So Shriji Mahãrãj said, “The vruttis of the indriyas of one whose
worldly desires have not become blunt cling to the vishays. In fact,
The Vachanãmrut

297

they cannot be dislodged even by a thought process. In comparison,
the vruttis of one whose worldly desires have become blunt do not
enter the vishays immediately. If they were to enter the vishays, and
he were to attempt to withdraw them, they would withdraw
instantly – they would not remain attached to the vishays. However,
a person whose worldly desires have become completely uprooted is
oblivious to the vishays during the waking state, just as he is during
the state of deep sleep. He would regard all pleasant and unpleasant
vishays as equal and would behave as one who is gunãtit.”
6

Then Gopãlãnand Swãmi asked, “One’s worldly desires may
have become blunt, but what is the reason for them not being
removed from their roots?”

7

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “The answer is that if a person has
perfectly imbibed the following four qualities, then his worldly desires
would become uprooted: gnãn in the form of knowledge of the ãtmã,
vairãgya in the form of detachment from all things that have evolved
out of Prakruti, dharma in the form of brahmacharya, etc., and
bhakti coupled with the knowledge of God’s greatness. Any deficiency
in these four qualities leads to a proportional deficiency in uprooting
one’s worldly desires.”

8

Having given the reply, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Now allow Me to
ask a question. Countless spiritual endeavours have been prescribed
for a spiritual aspirant to perform in order to attain God. Out of all
of them, by which one, powerful endeavour can all flaws be eradicated
and all virtues be acquired?”

9
10

The paramhansas could not answer the question.
So Shriji Mahãrãj revealed, “If one has bhakti coupled with the
knowledge of God’s countless powers as described by Kapildev to
Devhuti in ◊
‘ jÿÊmÊÁÃ flÊÃÙ˘ÿ¢ ‚Íÿ¸SÃ¬ÁÃ ◊jÿÊÃ˜...H’i then all of one’s
flaws would be eradicated. Moreover, even if one does not possess
gnãn, vairãgya and dharma, one still attains them. Thus, this
spiritual endeavour is the best of all.”
i Mad-bhayãd-vãti vãto’yam sooryas-tapati mad-bhayãt…||

It is by fear of me that the wind [Vãyu] blows, Surya [i.e. the sun] shines, Indra
[i.e. the clouds] rains, Agni [i.e. fire] burns, and death [Yam] devours [the living].
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 3.25.42

The Vachanãmrut

298

11

Then Shriji Mahãrãj asked another question: “A deceitful person
who is also clever, cunningly conceals his deceitfulness. Please
explain how such a person’s deceitfulness can be recognised?”

12

Brahmãnand Swãmi answered, “Such a person can be
recognised by the fact that he keeps the company of someone who is
an antagonist of Satsang and who speaks ill of the Sant and God;
besides this, such a person cannot be known by any other means.”

13

Shriji Mahãrãj accepted the answer, but questioned further,
“Yes, but how can such a person be recognised if he does not keep the
company of such people?”

14

Brahmãnand Swãmi then added, “His deceitfulness would be
exposed in times of adverse circumstances.”

15

Shriji Mahãrãj confirmed, “That is the correct answer to the
question.”

16

Thereafter, Shriji Mahãrãj asked another question: “Which
single fault transforms all of a person’s virtues to faults?”

17

Shripãt Devãnand Swãmi replied, “If someone spites a devotee of
God, then all of his virtues become as good as faults.”

18

Shriji Mahãrãj clarified, “That is true, but I had another answer
in mind. A person may well be endowed with each and every virtue,
but if he believes God to be formless – not possessing a definite form –
then that is a grave flaw. So much so, that because of this flaw, all
of his virtues become flaws.”

19

Thereafter, Shriji Mahãrãj asked, “Why does one perceive faults
in a sãdhu?”

20

The paramhansas attempted to answer the question but were
unable to do so satisfactorily.

21

So Shriji Mahãrãj answered the question Himself: “An egotist
perceives faults in a sãdhu. This is because it is the very nature of
someone who is egotistical that if someone praises him, even though
that person may have a hundred faults, he would overlook them and
would instead greatly highlight a single virtue. Conversely, if a
person does not praise him, then even though that person may have a
hundred virtues, he would overlook all of them and highlight an
utterly insignificant fault. Consequently, he would initially spite
that person mentally, then verbally, and ultimately physically as
well. Thus, egotism is a grave vice. However, do not think that only
The Vachanãmrut

299

the shrewd are egotistical and the naïve are not. In actual fact, the
naïve are more egotistical than the shrewd.”
22

Thereupon, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, how can
egotism be eradicated?”

23

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “He who thoroughly realises the
greatness of God cannot be egotistical. Look at Uddhavji, how wise
he was! He was proficient in the Nitishatak and had physical
characteristics like that of a king. Yet, because he had understood
the greatness of God, he put aside his self-importance upon seeing the
gopis’ love for God, and prayed, ‘May I become a tree, a vine, a blade
of grass or maybe even a shrub – anything that has been touched by
the dust from the feet of the gopis.’

24

“Tulsidãs has also said,

ÃÈ‹‚Ë ÖÿÊ∑§ ◊ÈπŸ‚ ÷Í‹ ÁŸ∑§‚ ⁄UÊ◊–
ÃÊ∑§ ¬ª ∑§Ë ¬„ÁŸÿÊ¢ ◊⁄U ÃŸ ∑§Ë øÊ◊Hi
That is, even if someone utters the name of God unintentionally, a
person who realises God’s greatness would make shoes from his own
skin and offer them to that person. If that is so, would he harbour
any egotism before a devotee of God who constantly engages himself
in worship and in chanting the name of God, who bows down to God
and who realises the greatness of God? Certainly not. Thus, egotism
is eradicated when one realises the greatness of God, but without
understanding the greatness of God, egotism simply cannot be
eradicated. Therefore, whosoever wishes to eradicate egotism should
realise the greatness of God and the Sant.”
|| Vachanãmrut Loyã-16 || 124 ||

Loyã-17
Reverence and Condemnation
1

On the night of Mãgshar vadi Amãs, Samvat 1877 [4 January
1821], Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot in Surã
Khãchar’s darbãr in Loyã. He had tied a white feto around His head
i Tulsee jyãke mukhanse bhoole nikase rãm |

Tãke pag kee paheniyã mere tan kee chãm ||

The Vachanãmrut

300

and had tied a bokãni with another white feto. He was also wearing
a warm, red dagli with a white angarkhu inside. He was wearing a
white khes as well. In addition to this, He had covered Himself with
a thick, cotton cloth, over which He had wrapped a yellow blanket.
At that time, while Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting in a pleased mood, an
assembly of munis as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him.
2

Then, of His own will, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “See how powerful
the force of God’s mãyã is! It can cause great perversity. Someone
who previously seemed very virtuous, for example, can suddenly
become extremely vile.”

3

So saying, Shriji Mahãrãj urged the paramhansas, “Ask
questions today, so that we can talk.”

4

Thereupon, Nityãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, the very same
person who was previously virtuous and who revered God later begins
to condemn Him. How, then, can a virtuous person remain virtuous
and never let his understanding become impaired, amidst even the
most adverse places, times, actions and company?”

5

Shriji Mahãrãj answered, “If a person is indifferent to his body,
has firmly realised his self to be the ãtmã, maintains vairãgya
towards the panchvishays and has absolute faith in God coupled with
the knowledge of His greatness, then his mind will never become
perverted – even amidst the most adverse circumstances imaginable.
On the other hand, one who believes one’s self to be the body and does
not have an intense aversion for the panchvishays would spite a
sãdhu if he were to denounce the vishays, even though the sãdhu
may be senior. Such a person would ultimately spite God as well.
Furthermore, if someone has firm faith in God but lacks an extreme
aversion towards the vishays and is still attracted to them, then even
if a person like Muktãnand Swãmi were to denounce those objects, he
would go as far as to cut off the person’s head with a sword in order
to harm that person.”

6

Nityãnand Swãmi then asked, “Someone may identify his self
with the body and may be attracted to the panchvishays as well; yet
he seems to survive in the Satsang fellowship. How can this be
explained?”

7

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “He survives in Satsang only as long as
he is not confronted by an adverse situation. If a great sãdhu or God
The Vachanãmrut

301

were to denounce his egotism, cravings for taste, avarice, lust, anger
or his belief that he is the body, then he would surely develop
contempt for that sãdhu. Then he would certainly malign him and
thus fall from Satsang. For example, whoever has drunk sweetened
milk that has been poisoned by the venom of a snake, even though he
may be living at present, is sure to die – within half an hour or an
hour, in the morning or in the evening, today or tomorrow;
eventually, he will die. In the same manner, he who identifies his
self with the body will definitely bear contempt for the sãdhu and will
eventually fall from Satsang – either after one month or after two
months; after one year or after two years or even after ten years; or
maybe at the time of death or even after death – he will certainly fall.
8

“In comparison, if a person does not identify his self with the
body and believes, ‘I am the ãtmã, due to which this body functions; I
am characterised by eternal existence; I enlighten the indriyas and
antahkaran. I am not one who becomes happy by possessing wealth,
women, etc. Nor am I one who is saddened by not possessing them’ –
then such a person never bears contempt for the sãdhu, no matter
how strongly the sãdhu denounces the panchvishays or the belief
that one is the body. Furthermore, he would never quarrel with the
sãdhu over insignificant issues, nor would he hold a grudge against
him.”

9

Thereupon Nityãnand Swãmi asked again, “How can one
recognise someone who has an aversion for the panchvishays?”

10

Shriji Mahãrãj answered, “A person with an aversion for the
panchvishays can be recognised by the following characteristics:
When he receives sumptuous food, he would eat it, but he would not
enjoy it as much as he would enjoy eating simple food. In fact, he
would be troubled by it. Also, he would become upset wearing fine
clothes; he would not enjoy them as much as he would enjoy wearing
tattered, coarse clothes. In fact, his mind becomes troubled by fine
clothes. If he were to receive a luxurious bed, or if someone were to
honour him, in fact, if he were to receive any sort of pleasant object,
his mind would become troubled by it; in no way would he be pleased
by it. On seeing such a person, one should realise, ‘He has an
aversion for the vishays.’”

11

Then Muktãnand Swãmi asked another question, “Mahãrãj, how
can such an aversion for the panchvishays be developed?”
The Vachanãmrut

302

12

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “The principal means for developing
such an aversion for the panchvishays is the knowledge of God’s
greatness, and thereafter, ãtmã-realisation and vairãgya.

13

“Now, what is this greatness of God? Well, it is by the fear of
God that Indra rains; that the sun, the moon and flames of fire emit
light; that the earth supports one and all; that the oceans do not
exceed their boundaries; and that the herbs bear fruit in their
appropriate seasons.
Moreover, it is God who is the creator,
sustainer and destroyer of the world, and whose powers include kãl,
mãyã, Purush and Akshar. What object in the world, then, can
attract someone who has understood the greatness of God in this
manner? Lust, anger, avarice, egotism, jealousy, cravings for taste,
fine clothes, wealth, women, in fact, none of the panchvishays can
bind him. This is because he has assessed everything. He knows,
‘God is like this, and these are the rewards of engaging in God’s
worship and listening to spiritual discourses. Akshar is like this,
and the bliss associated with him is like this. Furthermore, the bliss
of Golok, Vaikunth and Shwetdwip is like this, whereas the pleasures
of swarg are like this, and the happiness of a kingdom is like this.’
In this manner, a person who has inferred the happiness latent
within everything realises the bliss of God to be the highest and then
attaches himself to Him. Then, is there any object in the world that
can draw him away from the holy feet of God? There is none. Take,
for example, a piece of iron. Once touched by a pãrasmani, it is
transformed into gold. Thereafter, it cannot be transformed back
into iron even by the pãrasmani itself. Similarly, one who has
realised the greatness of God cannot be made to fall from the holy feet
of God even by God Himself. Could he, then, be made to fall by any
other object? Of course not.

14

“In addition to realising the greatness of God, such a person also
deeply realises the greatness of the Sant who worships God. He feels,
‘This Sant is truly great because he is a true devotee of the manifest
form of God.’ Uddhav, for example, was very learned, but because he
had understood the greatness of God, he did not become conceited due
to his intelligence. On the contrary, he yearned for the dust from the
feet of the gopis and thus asked to be reborn as a vine. The reason
for this was that he had witnessed the gopis’ profound love towards
God, whom even the verses of the Vedas seek. How, then, can a
person who realises the greatness of the Sant of God harbour any
conceit before the Sant? Why could he not bow down to him? In
The Vachanãmrut

303

actual fact, he would behave as a servant of a servant before the
Sant. Even if the Sant were to repeatedly physically mistreat him,
he would tolerate it and would believe, ‘It is my great fortune that I
am bearing the contempt of such a Sant. Besides, due to my
prãrabdha, I would have been forced to bear the abuses of my wife
and children, my parents, and the king. I may even have had to eat
the leaves of dodi and mothya. At least here, in the company of the
Sant, I am fortunate enough to be able to observe the vow of nontaste. Due to my prãrabdha, I may have been forced to wear tattered
clothes or rags. At least here with the Sant I am fortunate enough to
have a blanket to cover myself with.’
15

“Conversely, if a person enters an assembly of sãdhus and is not
accordingly honoured by the Sant, and if he then bears an aversion
towards the Sant, it implies that that person has not realised the
greatness of the Sant; otherwise he would not bear an aversion in
that manner. Consider the following as an example: If the British
Governor of Mumbai were seated in an assembly, and if at that time
a poor man were to enter that assembly but was not given a seat or
welcomed in anyway, would the poor man become angry with the
Governor? Would he feel like swearing at the Governor? Not at all.
Why? Because the poor man has realised the eminence of the British
official; that is, ‘He is the ruler of the land, and I am a mere pauper.’
Hence, he does not become upset. In the same manner, then, if a
person has realised the greatness of the Sant, then regardless of how
much the Sant scorns him, he would never become upset with the
Sant. In fact, if he does find a fault in anyone, he would find it in
himself, but in no way would he perceive a flaw in the Sant. Thus,
he who has realised the greatness of God and the Sant has a firm
foundation in Satsang. Conversely, one cannot be certain about a
person who has not realised such greatness.”
|| Vachanãmrut Loyã-17 || 125 ||

Loyã-18
Conviction of God
1

On the night of Posh sudi 1, Samvat 1877 [5 January 1821],
Swãmi Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated
cot in Surã Khãchar’s darbãr in Loyã. He was wearing a white khes
and a warm, red dagli. In addition to this, He had covered Himself
The Vachanãmrut

304

with a thick, cotton cloth and a blanket. He had tied a white feto
around His head and had tied a bokãni with another white feto. At
that time, an assembly of paramhansas and an assembly of devotees
from various places had gathered before Him.
2

Then, after the paramhansas finished the evening ãrti and
prayers, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Please sing a devotional song.”
Thereupon, Muktãnand Swãmi and some other paramhansas sang
devotional songs while playing musical instruments.

3

Shriji Mahãrãj then said, “Now please conclude the singing as I
wish to talk. If any doubts arise in what I say, please ask.”

4

So saying, He began, “To develop the conviction of God is more
difficult than anything else.
Moreover, because this topic of
conviction is extremely complex, I am afraid of discussing it. I feel,
‘Upon discussing this topic, what if someone were to misunderstand
it? What if, due to this discussion, any inclination that one may
have firmly cultivated were to be destroyed, or even be uprooted?’
Yet, there is no alternative but to reveal this fact. If one does not
interpret it correctly, many problems can arise. Yet, until one has
not understood this fact, much deficiency will remain in one’s
understanding. That is why I wish to deliver this discourse.

5

“When God assumed the form of Varãh, his form as a boar was
very ugly. Assuming the avatãr of Matsya, his form was exactly like
that of a fish. In the Kachchha avatãr, his form was exactly like
that of other tortoises. In the Nrusinh avatãr, his form was as
frightening as a lion. In the Vãman avatãr, his form as a dwarf had
short hands and legs, a broad waist and a plump body. In the Vyãs
avatãr, he appeared black, with lots of body hair and a foul body
odour.

6

“Now, all those who attained God in whichever form He assumed
meditated on that particular form. Then, as a result of that
meditation, they attained a form similar to that form of God. Now,
did those who attained Varãh see God exactly like a boar in his
abode? Did those who attained Matsyaji see God exactly like a fish in
his abode? Did those who attained Kurma see God exactly like a
tortoise in his abode? Did those who attained Nrusinh see God
exactly like a lion in his abode? Did those who attained Hayagriv see
God exactly as a horse in his abode? Did those who worshipped
Varãh as if he were their husband become a female boar? Did those
who worshipped him with the love of a friend become a boar? Did
The Vachanãmrut

305

those who worshipped Matsya as if he were their husband become a
female fish? Did those who worshipped him with the love of a friend
become a fish? Did those who worshipped Kurma as if he were their
husband become a female tortoise? Did those who worshipped him
with the love of a friend become a tortoise? Did those who worshipped
Nrusinh as if he were their husband become a lioness? Did those
who worshipped him with the love of a friend become a lion? Did
those who worshipped Hayagriv as if he were their husband become a
female horse? Did those who worshipped him with the love of a
friend become a horse? If the original form of God was exactly like
that of Varãh, Matsya, etc., then by meditating on them, the devotees
of each avatãr should attain that same form, and all that I have just
mentioned should happen. However, this is not the case.
7

“Then you may ask, ‘What is the form of that God like?’ Well,
the answer is that God is characterised by eternal existence,
consciousness and bliss, and possesses a form full of divine light. In
every single pore of His body, there is light equivalent to millions and
millions of suns. Moreover, that God is so handsome that He puts
even millions of Kãmdevs to shame. He is the lord of countless
millions of brahmãnds, the king of kings, the controller of all, the
antaryãmi of all, and extremely blissful. Before His bliss, the
pleasure of seeing countless beautiful women pales into
insignificance. In fact, before the bliss of the form of that God, the
pleasures of the vishays of this realm and the higher realms pale into
insignificance. Such is the form of God. That form always has two
arms, but by His wish, He may appear to have four arms, or
sometimes to have eight arms, or He may even be seen as having a
thousand arms.

8

“Furthermore, it is that very God who assumes the forms of
Matsya, Kachchha, Varãh, etc., and the forms of Rãm, Krishna, etc.,
for the purpose of fulfilling some task. He does not, however,
abandon His original form to assume the form of these avatãrs. That
God Himself assumes the forms of Matsya, Kachchha, etc.,
possessing countless divine powers and boundless strength. Then,
once the task for which He assumed a body is completed, He
abandons that body. Hence, it is said in the Shrimad Bhãgwat:

The Vachanãmrut

306

÷Í÷Ê⁄U— ˇÊÁ¬ÃÙ ÿŸ... ÃÊ¥ ÃŸÈ¢ Áfl¡„UÊfl¡—–
∑§á≈U∑¢§ ∑§á≈U∑§Ÿfl mÿ¢ øÊ¬ËÁ‡ÊÃÈ— ‚◊◊˜H i
Through whichever physical body God relieved the burden of the
earth, after removing the ‘thorn’ – in the form of the belief that one is
the body – which had pierced the chaitanya of the beings, God also
abandoned His own physical body, which was the ‘thorn’ used to
remove the other ‘thorn’.
9

“Also, God assumed the form of Nrusinh for the purpose of
killing a demon. After completing that task, He decided to abandon
that particular body. But who could kill a lion? So, by God’s own
will, Shiv, in the form of kãl, came assuming the form of a sharabh.
A fight ensued between Nrusinh and the sharabh. As a result, both
left their physical bodies. That is how Shiv came to be known as
Sharbheshwar Mahãdev, and the location where Nrusinhji left his
body became Nãrsinhi Shilã.

10

“Moreover, wherever paintings of Matsya, Kurma and other
avatãrs of God are portrayed, the lower portions of the paintings
depict the form as a fish, a tortoise, etc. However, the upper portions
of the paintings depict the murti of God with a conch, a disc, a mace,
a lotus, a vaijayanti garland, silk garments, a crown, the Shrivatsa
mark, as well as other such symbols. Thus, the form of God is
eternally like this.

11

“Initially, at the time of his birth, Shri Krishna Bhagwãn gave
darshan in a four-armed form to Vasudev and Devki. He also gave
darshan to Akrur in water in a four-armed form. When Rukmini
fainted, he again gave darshan in a four-armed form. Arjun has also
said: ‘ÃŸÒfl M§¬áÊ øÃÈ÷È¸¡Ÿ ‚„Ud’Ê„UÙ ÷fl ÁflE◊ÍÃ¸H’ii . So Arjun also saw
him as having a four-armed form. When Shri Krishna Bhagwãn was
seated under a pipal tree after the Yãdavs had slaughtered
i Bhoo-bhãraha kshapito yena… tãm tanum vijahãvajaha|

Kantakam kantakeneva dvayam chãpeeshituhu samam||
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 1.15.35 & 34
ii Tenaiva roopena chaturbhujen sahasra-bãho bhava vishvamurte||
O One Whose Form is the Universe [Krishna]! O Thousand-armed [Krishna]!
Please [return] to that [i.e. your original] four-armed form!
Bhagwad Gitã: 11.46

The Vachanãmrut

307

themselves, Uddhavji and Maitreya Rishi saw the form of God having
four-arms, along with a conch, a disc, a mace, a lotus and silk
garments.
Moreover, Shri Krishna Bhagwãn was dark in
complexion, yet his beauty is described as being capable of putting
millions of Kãmdevs to shame.
12

“Therefore, although God appears to be like a human, the
aforementioned luminosity and bliss are all inherent within Him.
One who has the inclination of dhyãn, dhãrnã and samãdhi sees that
very form as having the light of millions and millions of suns; such a
person does not need to resort to using a torch or an oil lamp.
Moreover, even though God is so luminous, the fact that this divine
light cannot be seen is due to God’s wish. If that God willed, ‘May
the devotees see Me as full of divine light,’ then that same form would
be seen as luminous. So, one who has a conviction of God realises,
‘The divine powers, opulence and attendants of the abodes of Golok,
Vaikunth, Shwetdwip and Brahmapur all accompany God.
Furthermore, those who serve Him are Rãdhikã, Lakshmi, etc.’ He
sees God in such a transcendent manner. But those who are fools see
Him as a human. Shri Krishna Bhagwãn has also mentioned in the
Gitã:

•fl¡ÊŸÁãÃ ◊Ê¢ ◊Í…UÊ ◊ÊŸÈ·Ë¥ ÃŸÈ◊ÊÁüÊÃ◊˜–
¬⁄¢ ÷Êfl◊¡ÊŸãÃÙ ◊◊ ÷ÍÃ◊„UE⁄U◊˜H i
Therefore, those who are fools fail to realise such transcendence of
God and instead perceive human traits in God, seeing Him as a
human like themselves.
13

“What is meant by perceiving human traits? Well, it is when all
of the feelings of the antahkaran – i.e., lust, anger, avarice,
infatuation, arrogance, matsar, desires, cravings, etc.; and all of the
characteristics of the physical body – i.e., bones, skin, faeces, urine,
etc., as well as birth, childhood, youth, old age, death, etc.; and all
other human characteristics are perceived in God. A person who
perceives such characteristics may appear to have a conviction of
i Avajãnanti mãm moodhã mãnusheem tanum-ãshritam|

Param bhãvam-ajãnanto mama bhoota-maheshvaram||
Fools deride me as having a human form, but they do not realise my
transcendental form as the great lord of all beings.
Bhagwad Gitã: 9.11

The Vachanãmrut

308

God, but his conviction is flawed. As a result, he will surely fall from
the Satsang fellowship.
14

“That God’s form is supremely divine – there is not even the
slightest trace of human traits in God. Therefore, one should not
perceive human traits in God, and one should instead initially view
Him as a deity; then one should view Him as Brahmã, etc.; then one
should view Him as Pradhãn-Purush; then as Prakruti-Purush; then
as Akshar; and finally as Purushottam – who transcends Akshar.
For example, upon seeing the incredible, divine actions of Shri
Krishna Bhagwãn, the gopas of Vraj initially viewed him as a deity.
Then, after listening to the words of Gargãchãrya, they viewed him
as God. Then they said, ‘You are God. Therefore, show us your
abode.’ Thereafter, they were shown Akshardhãm. One who believes
God to be divine in this way should be known to have complete
conviction.

15

“Sometimes people say, ‘Initially, this person did not have the
conviction of God, but now he does.’ Does that mean that he did not
see God initially? Well, he certainly did see Him, but he perceived
human traits in Him. Later, after he develops conviction, he does
darshan believing God to be completely divine; that is known as
having developed the conviction of God. Moreover, if a person does
not believe God to be completely divine, then he repeatedly becomes
upset and constantly perceives virtues and flaws; i.e., he thinks, ‘God
is favouring that person, but not me,’ or ‘He often calls that person,
but not me,’ or ‘He has more affection for that person, and less for
me.’ In this way, he continues perceiving virtues and flaws. As a
result, his heart becomes more and more despondent day by day, and
ultimately he falls from Satsang. Therefore, one should certainly not
perceive human traits in God.

16

“Further, one should not perceive flaws even in the devotees of
God. Why? Because physically a devotee may be blind, disabled,
deaf, old, unattractive, or he may have leukoderma; but when he
dies, does he still remain blind or disabled in the abode of God?
Certainly not. Those are all features of humans. After leaving these
features behind, he assumes a divine form and becomes brahmarup.
Therefore, if one should not perceive flaws in the devotees of God,
then how can one possibly perceive them in God?

17

“Regardless of whether you realise this fact today or you realise
it after a hundred years, it must be realised. In fact, there is no
The Vachanãmrut

309

alternative but to realise it and imbibe it firmly. Therefore, all
devotees should remember this principle of Mine and discuss it
amongst each other. Furthermore, whenever someone suffers a
setback due to some misunderstanding, he should be alerted by
mentioning this. In fact, one should discuss this principle of Mine
routinely, at least once a day – this is My command. So please do not
forget it; please, please, do not forget it!”
18

Saying this, Shriji Mahãrãj bid ‘Jai Swãminãrãyan’ to all of the
devotees and returned to His residence smiling. After listening to
Shriji Mahãrãj’s discourse, all of the sãdhus and devotees realised
Shriji Mahãrãj as the cause of all avatãrs, the ‘avatãri’, and greatly
consolidated their belief of Him as being completely divine.”
|| Vachanãmrut Loyã-18 || 126 ||

|| End of Loyã Section ||

The Vachanãmrut

310

PANCHÃLÃ SECTION
Panchãlã-1
One Who Is Intelligent; Applying a Thought Process
1

On Fãgun sudi 4, Samvat 1877 [3 March 1821], Shriji Mahãrãj
was sitting on a large, decorated cot that had been placed on a
platform in Jhinãbhãi’s darbãr in Panchãlã. He was wearing a
white angarkhu and a white khes. He had tied a white feto around
His head, the end of which was hanging on the right side. He had
also covered Himself with a white blanket. At that time, an
assembly of paramhansas as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him.

2

Then, after the evening ãrti had been performed, Shriji Mahãrãj
sat on a cylindrical pillow and said, “I wish to ask a question to all of
these senior paramhansas and senior devotees: One may have
affection for God and also firm resolution to observe dharma;
however, if one has not applied a thought process then the extremely
alluring vishays, i.e., alluring sights, sounds, smells, tastes and
touch, will never be considered equivalent to the extremely repulsive
vishays; nor will they be considered inferior to them. So, which
thought must be applied so that the extremely alluring vishays seem
equivalent to or inferior to the extremely repulsive vishays? I ask
this question to all of the senior paramhansas and to all of the senior
devotees. Whoever has, through whichever thought, realised the
alluring vishays to be like the repulsive vishays or has realised them
to be far more repulsive than even the repulsive ones, please reveal
your thoughts.”

3

Thereafter, all of the paramhansas and all of the devotees
disclosed their thoughts.

4

Shriji Mahãrãj then said, “Having heard your thoughts, I shall
now tell you about the thought which I have maintained. Consider
the following example: If someone sends a letter from a distant land,
the intelligence of the writer of that letter can be inferred by reading
the letter. Now, the appearance and manner of speech of the five
Pãndavs, Draupadi, Kuntãji, Rukmini, Satyabhãmã, Jãmbavati and
The Vachanãmrut

311

other queens of God, of God’s son, Sãmb, and of other devotees are
written in the scriptures. By hearing those scriptures, inference of
their appearance allows us to visualise them as if having firsthand
darshan; also, their intelligence can be inferred from their words. In
the same manner, one hears from the Purãns, the Mahãbhãrat and
other scriptures that God is the all-doer – responsible for the creation,
sustenance and dissolution of this cosmos – and that He eternally has
a form. If He did not have a form, He could not be called the all-doer.
Furthermore, Aksharbrahma is the abode in which God resides. It is
that God who has a divine form; who is luminous and blissful; and
who, at the time of creation, gives a buddhi, indriyas, a man and
prãns to the jivas that had been merged in mãyã along with their
kãran bodies at the time of dissolution. Why does He give these to
the jivas? Well, He does so to enable them to indulge in the superior,
intermediate and inferior types of vishays as well as for the purpose
of attaining liberation.
5

“God has created enjoyments and places of enjoyment for the
sake of those jivas; but within that, the creation of the superior
vishays are for the purpose of alleviating the miseries of the inferior
vishays. For example, a wealthy merchant may have had trees
planted on both sides of a road to provide shade; he may have had
water fountains constructed; he may also have had alms-houses and
guest-houses constructed. He does all of this for the poor. Similarly,
before God, Brahmã, Shiv, Indra and other deities are as poor as
those paupers of ’47 who boiled the fruits of pipal trees and then ate
them. It is God who has created those superior vishays for the
happiness of Brahmã and the other deities, and for humans. Also, in
the previous example, since the rich merchant builds amenities in
the form of alms-houses, guest-houses, etc., for the sake of the poor, it
is obvious that compared to those, the luxuries in the merchant’s own
home must be far greater. Similarly, God has created happiness for
Brahmã and others; so it is obvious to an intelligent person that
compared to those, the bliss of His own abode must be far more
superior. An intelligent person, then, can infer that there is an
extreme abundance of bliss in the abode of God. As a result, the
alluring vishays become repulsive for him.

6

“Furthermore, all of the happiness related to vishays which is
apparent in this world, be it for animals, humans, deities, ghosts,
etc., is only due to some relation with God, and when coupled with
dharma. But the bliss that is in God Himself cannot be found
The Vachanãmrut

312

anywhere else. Consider the following example: The light from this
burning torch which falls a short distance away is not as intense as
the light in the vicinity of the torch. Very far away, there is no light
at all. In the same way, elsewhere there is only a little bliss, but
absolute bliss is only available in the vicinity of God. The further one
is distanced from God, the less bliss one experiences. Therefore, one
who is an aspirant realises, ‘The further away I am from God, the
more miseries I will face, and ultimately I will become extremely
miserable. On the other hand, even the slightest association with
God will provide much bliss. Therefore, I wish to keep close
association with God. By doing so, I shall experience the highest
form of bliss.’ One who thinks in this manner, keeps a desire for the
bliss of God and employs any means to maintain very close
association with God can be called intelligent.
7

“Moreover, the happiness of humans exceeds the happiness of
animals; and the happiness of a king exceeds that; and the happiness
of deities exceeds that; and the happiness of Indra exceeds that; then
Bruhaspati’s happiness, then Brahmã’s, then Vaikunth’s. Beyond
that, the happiness of Golok is superior, and finally, the bliss of God’s
Akshardhãm is far more superior.

8

“In this way, realising the intensity of the bliss of God, one who
is intelligent realises all other pleasures related to vishays to be
insignificant. Compared to the bliss of God, the pleasures of Brahmã
and others are like that of a poor man who begs with an earthen
vessel at the door of a rich householder. When I think of the bliss of
the abode of that God, I become indifferent to all other forms of
happiness, and I feel, ‘When will I leave this body to experience that
bliss?’ Moreover, when I naturally indulge in the panchvishays, I
entertain no particular thought; but, if I were to sense some pleasure
in an object, My thoughts would immediately be diverted to the bliss
of God, and My mind would become extremely indifferent.

9

“These thoughts can only be fully realised by one who is
intelligent. In fact, I have affection towards one who is intelligent.
Why? Because, I Myself am intelligent and My thought process is
such. Moreover, one who is intelligent will also think similarly. In
this way, it appears to Me that My thought is superior to all of your
thoughts; therefore, all of you should firmly imbibe this thought of
Mine in your hearts. Without applying this thought, if one’s vrutti
does become attached to alluring vishays, it will barely become
The Vachanãmrut

313

detached – and that too, after much effort. As for one who has
applied this thought, however, very little effort is involved in
withdrawing one’s vrutti; one can easily realise the vanity of the
vishays.
10

“This fact can only be understood by one who has a sharp
intelligence and a craving for higher happiness. For example, a paisa
is worth more than a cowry, and a rupee more than that; a gold coin
is more valuable than that, and a chintãmani is more valuable than
that. Similarly, wherever there are pleasures of the panchvishays,
the bliss of God in His abode is far more superior in comparison.
Therefore, this thought only settles in the heart of a person who is
intelligent and who thinks in such a manner. When this thought
does firmly settle in the heart, even if he happens to be in a forest, he
would feel, ‘I am surrounded by countless people and the wealth of a
kingdom’; he would not believe himself to be miserable. Conversely,
if he were in Indra’s realms, he would feel, ‘I am sitting in a forest’;
he would not be gratified by the pleasures in the realm of Indra; in
fact, he would realise those pleasures to be vain.

11

“Therefore, keeping this thought in mind, all of you should
resolve, ‘Now we want to reach only the abode of God; we do not want
to be tempted by the vain pleasures of the panchvishays along the
way.’ So, please keep such a firm resolve. Because what I have told
all of you is My principle, please imbibe it firmly in your lives.”
|| Vachanãmrut Panchãlã-1 || 127 ||

Panchãlã-2
Sãnkhya and Yoga
1

On Fãgun sudi 7, Samvat 1877 [10 March 1821], Shriji Mahãrãj
was sitting on a large, decorated cot that had been placed on a
platform in Jhinãbhãi’s darbãr in Panchãlã. He was wearing a
white khes and had covered Himself with a white blanket. He had
also tied a white feto around His head. At that time, an assembly of
paramhansas as well as an assembly of devotees from various places
had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Please bring the Mokshdharma scripture so that we can arrange for a discourse on the
chapter of Sãnkhya and the chapter of Yoga.” Thereupon, the
The Vachanãmrut

314

scripture was brought, and Nityãnand Swãmi commenced the
reading.
3

Shriji Mahãrãj then said, “The followers of Yoga consider jiva
and ishwar to be the 25th element and Paramãtmã to be the 26th
element. On the other hand, followers of Sãnkhya include jiva and
ishwar with the 24 elements2, and consider Paramãtmã to be the 25th
element. Of the two, the followers of Yoga believe that regardless of
however much one contemplates upon the ãtmã and non-ãtmã, or
however much one endeavours, without accepting the refuge of the
manifest form of God, one cannot attain liberation. On the other
hand, followers of Sãnkhya believe that if one understands the
ultimate fate of all deities, humans, etc., and develops vairãgya for
the vishays and realises one’s ãtmã as transcending the three bodies6,
then one becomes a mukta. But since each of these two types of
beliefs have their own deficiencies, one should employ certain
methods of interpretation for the purpose of resolving those
deficiencies.

4

“The drawback of the Yoga doctrine is that both the jiva and
ishwar have been considered as the 25th element and both have been
said to have bodies comprised of 24 elements. As a result, both the
jiva and ishwar seem equal. This would suggest that the sthul body
is the same as virãt, the sukshma body is the same as sutrãtmã, and
the kãran body is the same as avyãkrut. It also suggests that the
waking state is the same as that of sustenance, the dream state is
the same as that of creation, and the deep sleep state is the same as
that of dissolution. Moreover, vishwa, taijas and prãgna would be
considered equal to Vishnu, Brahmã and Shiv respectively. Thus,
those followers would worship the 26th element with such
understanding. So, to remove this deficiency of equating jiva and
ishwar, one should learn the following method of interpretation from
a wise person: The five bhuts residing in the body of ishwar are
known as mahãbhuts, and those bhuts sustain the bodies of all jivas.
On the other hand, the five bhuts in the body of the jiva are minor
and are incapable of sustaining others. Also, the jiva possesses
limited knowledge compared to ishwar, who is all-knowing. One
should learn such a method of interpretation so that the jiva and
ishwar are not understood to be equal to each other. If one has not
done that and some adversary were to ask a question in a debate,
then one would find it difficult to reply. As a result, one’s own
understanding would become confused. But if one has learnt such a
The Vachanãmrut

315

method, then even if someone were to raise a question, one would not
allow the jiva and ishwar to be considered as being equal to each
other. Therefore, one should learn such a method of interpretation so
that the jiva and ishwar do not seem to be equal, and one should
listen to words to that effect.
5

“Next, the drawback of the followers of the Sãnkhya doctrine is
that they consider Paramãtmã to be the 25th element, transcending
the 24 elements. They consider the 24 elements as being false and
Paramãtmã as being satya. If that were so, who would attain that
Paramãtmã? After all, the jiva, who is the attainer, is not considered
distinct from the elements. Therefore, to remove that deficiency, one
should learn the following method of interpretation from a wise
person: Jiva and ishwar have been included with the elements
because those 24 elements cannot exist without the jiva and ishwar.
But in reality jiva and ishwar are distinct from those elements and
do attain Paramãtmã.
One should learn such a method of
interpretation. If one has not done so, and an opponent in a debate
were to ask a question, doubts would arise; i.e., one would think, ‘If
the elements are truly false, then what is the purpose of prescribing
the observance of dharma such as brahmacharya, etc., and spiritual
endeavours such as shravan, manan, nididhyãs, etc., to attain
Paramãtmã?’ Therefore, jiva and ishwar have been included with
the elements because they have attained oneness with the elements,
but in reality they are totally distinct from those elements and do
attain Paramãtmã. In this way, followers of Sãnkhya should learn
such methods of interpretation from a wise sãdhu.

6

“Moreover, the followers of Yoga propound methods such as the
following: Liberation is attained by meditating on the manifest form
of the avatãrs of God such as Matsya, Kachchha, Varãh, Nrusinh,
Vãman, Rãm , Krishna, etc. But the followers of Sãnkhya accept
methods which claim that liberation is attained when one fully
realises the form of God, through experience, as described by the
various Shruti scriptures – for example, as stated in: ‘ÿÃÙ flÊøÙ

ÁŸflÃ¸ãÃ •¬˝Êåÿ ◊Ÿ‚Ê ‚„U’i.

Both doctrines are good and have been

i Yato vãcho nivartante aprãpya manasã saha

From where speech returns along with the mind without having attained
[Brahma, i.e. God].

The Vachanãmrut

316

accepted by the great; one who follows both of them appropriately
does attain the highest state. In both of these doctrines, the same
spiritual endeavours have been prescribed, but the mode of worship
in each is not the same; in fact, it is extremely different.”
7

Having spoken in this manner, Shriji Mahãrãj then told the
paramhansas, “Now please sing devotional songs.”

8

Thereupon Muktãnand Swãmi and some other paramhansas
commenced singing devotional songs to the accompaniment of
musical instruments. Following this, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Now
please stop the devotional songs. While you were singing, I thought
over the principles of both Sãnkhya and Yoga; please listen as I
explain.

9

“For one who follows Yoga, the luminous, divine form of God
which resides in Akshardhãm at the time of ãtyantik-pralay is
worthy of being meditated on. Moreover, God in the form of
Prakruti-Purush is also worthy of being meditating on, albeit to a
lesser extent. To a lesser extent than that, God in the form of the 24
elements, which have evolved from Prakruti-Purush, is also worthy
of being meditated on. To a lesser extent than that, Hiranyagarbh;
and to a lesser extent than that, Virãt – who has evolved from the 24
elements – is also worthy of being meditated on. Still to a lesser
extent than that, Brahmã, Vishnu, Mahesh, as well as the avatãrs of
God on this earth such as Matsya, Kurma, Nrusinh, Varãh, etc., as
well as shãligrãm and other murtis of God – are all worthy of being
meditated on. This, I realised while thinking, is the essence of the
doctrine of Yoga.

10

“Then, I thought over the Sãnkhya doctrine. They have done
away with all those forms, and it appears that they believe, ‘The
cause of all thoughts is the jiva, and since there is nothing as pure as
the jiva, it is appropriate to meditate on the jiva.’ In order to refute
this view of Sãnkhya, I again thought of Yoga.
Specifically,
Purushottam Bhagwãn – who transcends everything – has an anvay
relationship with Prakruti-Purush and all other entities. Therefore,
they are all God; all possess a divine form; all are satya and worthy of
being meditated on. Certain Vedic verses also support this fact: ‘‚flZ

Taittiriya Upanishad: 2.4.1

The Vachanãmrut

317

πÁÀflŒ¢ ’˝rÊÔ’i, ‘Ÿ„U ŸÊŸÊÁSÃ Á∑§@Ÿ’ii and ‘ßŒ¢ Á„U ÁflE¢ ÷ªflÊÁŸflÃ⁄UÙ ÿÃÙ
¡ªàSÕÊŸÁŸ⁄UÙœ‚¢÷flÊ—– ’iii. Thus, an aspirant who follows that path of

Yoga encounters no obstacles. Why? Because that path is easy and
relies on the manifest form of God. Because of this, through that
path even an ordinary person can attain liberation without any
difficulty.
11

“However, there is one drawback on that path: Prakruti-Purush,
etc., are thought of as being the components of the all-transcending
Purushottam Bhagwãn. That is, the following belief could develop:
Prakruti-Purush are components of God, and their components are
Hiranyagarbh, Virãt, etc. If such an understanding develops, then
that is a major drawback since one feels God is divisible and has
components; however, God is, in fact, indivisible, without
components, unchanging, imperishable and whole. Therefore, such a
misunderstanding should not be allowed to arise.

12

“Also, one should understand, ‘God is one and unparalleled,
while others such as Prakruti-Purush, etc., are His devotees and
meditate on Him.’ That is why they are referred to as forms of God.
Just as a great sãdhu who meditates on God is known as a form of
God, in the same way Prakruti-Purush, etc., are also forms of God.
Moreover, Purushottam Shri Krishna – who transcends everything –
Himself assumes the forms of Vãsudev, Sankarshan, Pradyumna
and Aniruddha, and assumes the avatãrs of Rãm, Krishna, etc.
Thus, He is worthy of being meditated on.’ If one has such an
understanding, then that path of Yoga is absolutely free of obstacles
and is the best path.

i Sarvam khalvidam brahma

Indeed, all this [i.e. the whole universe] is Brahma [i.e. the form of God].
Chhãndogya Upanishad: 3.14.1
ii Neha nãnãsti kinchana
There is nothing in this universe that is not the form of Brahma [i.e. God].
Bruhadãranyaka Upanishad: 6.4.19
iii Idam hi vishvam bhagavãn-ivetaro yato jagat-sthãna-nirodha-sambhavãhã|
Indeed, this universe is as if another form of God – who is the cause of the
creation, sustenance and dissolution of the world.
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 1.5.20

The Vachanãmrut

318

13

“Now the drawback of the Sãnkhya doctrine is that it claims,
‘All that is grasped via the antahkaran and the indriyas is false,
while all that is grasped through experience is satya.’ Thereby, they
propound all forms as being false. But along with that, they also
consider the forms of God that have manifested to liberate the jivas
as being false. In fact, they also view the forms of Aniruddha,
Pradyumna and Sankarshan as being false. They only accept
Vãsudev, who is nirgun. That is their major drawback.

14

“Therefore, it suits the followers of Sãnkhya to believe, ‘After
imbibing the thoughts of sãnkhya and considering whatever has
evolved from Prakruti-Purush as being perishable, one should realise
one’s own ãtmã as being distinct from all, as being pure and
brahmarup.
Then, understanding the form of God that has
manifested to liberate the jivas as being satya, one should meditate
on Him.’ In this manner, these two types of thoughts can be known
if one learns from someone who is wise, like Me; otherwise, even if
one studies or listens to the scriptures, one cannot understand them.

15

“In reality, the teachings of Yoga are actually for one who has
become brahmarup by initially having practised thoughts of sãnkhya.
Thus, it is said:

’˝rÊÔ÷ÍÃ— ¬˝‚ÛÊÊà◊Ê Ÿ ‡ÊÙøÁÃ Ÿ ∑§ÊæU˜ˇÊÁÃ–
‚◊— ‚fl¸·È ÷ÍÃ·È ◊jÁQ¢§ ‹÷Ã ¬⁄UÊ◊˜H i

i Brahma-bhootaha prasannãtmã na shochati na kãnkshati|

Samaha sarveshu bhooteshu mad-bhaktim labhate parãm||
One who has become brahmarup remains joyful, grieves nothing, desires
nothing, behaves equally with all beings, and attains my supreme bhakti.
Bhagwad Gitã: 18.54

The Vachanãmrut

319

•Êà◊Ê⁄UÊ◊Êp ◊ÈŸÿÙ ÁŸª˝¸ãÕÊ •åÿÈL§∑˝§◊–
∑È§fl¸ãàÿ„ÒUÃÈ∑§Ë¥ ÷ÁQ Á◊àÕê÷ÍÃªÈáÊÙ „UÁ⁄U—H i
¬Á⁄UÁŸÁDÔUÃÙ˘Á¬ ŸÒªÈ¸áÿ ©U?Ê◊o£Ù∑§‹Ë‹ÿÊ–
ªÎ„UËÃøÃÊ ⁄UÊ¡·¸ •ÊÅÿÊŸ¢ ÿŒœËÃflÊŸ˜H ii
16

“In this way, the Sãnkhya doctrine is dependent on Yoga. Why?
Because through that sãnkhya thought, the followers of Sãnkhya
realise all vishays that can be indulged in via the five indriyas and
four antahkarans – which are distinct from one’s own ãtmã – to be
totally vain. Therefore, such a person is not enticed by any objects,
nor does he become attached to them. Moreover, if someone were to
say to him, ‘This object is extremely pleasurable,’ he would think, ‘It
may be pleasurable, but it is perceived through the indriyas and
antahkaran; and that which the indriyas and antahkaran perceive is
asatya and perishable.’ Such is the firm understanding of a follower
of Sãnkhya, who also realises his own ãtmã as pure. Such a person
should meditate on, worship, and offer bhakti to God according to the
path of Yoga. If he does not adopt this, that would be a major flaw in
him.

17

“In this manner, I have described the eternal principles of the
Sãnkhya scriptures and the Yoga scriptures having thoroughly
pondered over them. The unorthodox proponents of Yoga and
Sãnkhya, however, have corrupted both paths. Those who are
proponents of Yoga try to establish the truth of forms, and in the
process they realise all people, the forms of Brahmã, Vishnu and

i Ãtmãrãmãsh-cha munayo nirgranthã apyurukrame|

Kurvantyahaitukeem bhaktim-ittham-bhoota-guno harihi||
Despite being engaged [only] in the ãtmã [i.e. having attained ãtmã-realisation]
and despite having overcome all base natures – the munis [still] offer selfless
bhakti to God [because] God possesses such [divine] qualities.
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 1.7.10
ii Parinishthito’pi nairgunya uttama-shloka-leelayã|
Gruheeta-chetã rãjarshe ãkhyãnam yad-adheetavãn||
O King [Parikshit]! Despite being perfectly poised in the nirgun state, I
[Shukdevji] – having been attracted by the divine actions and incidents of God –
studied the [Shrimad Bhãgwat] epic.
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 2.1.9

The Vachanãmrut

320

Shiv, as well as the forms of Rãm, Krishna and other avatãrs as
equal to each other. Followers of Sãnkhya denounce all forms, and in
the process they also denounce places of pilgrimage; observances;
murtis; yam and niyam; forms of dharma such as brahmacharya; as
well as Brahmã, Vishnu, Shiv; and Rãm, Krishna and other avatãrs.
Therefore, both, the unorthodox followers of Sãnkhya and the
unorthodox followers of Yoga, have deviated from the correct path.
As a result, they will be consigned to narak.”
|| Vachanãmrut Panchãlã-2 || 128 ||

Panchãlã-3
Muni Bãwã; That Which Is Instrumental in
Attaining Liberation Is Known as Intelligence
1

On Fãgun sudi 8, Samvat 1877 [11 March 1821], Shriji Mahãrãj
was sitting on a large, decorated cot in Jhinãbhãi’s darbãr in
Panchãlã. He was wearing a white khes and had covered Himself
with a white blanket. He had also tied a white feto around His head.
At that time, an assembly of paramhansas as well as an assembly of
devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Then Shriji Mahãrãj said to the paramhansas, “Please begin a
question-answer session.”

3

Thereupon Muni Bãwã asked Brahmãnand Swãmi, “We have
attained this Satsang fellowship as well as the association of God. All
other flaws have all been eradicated and we also have zeal to do
satsang. Despite this, why do egotism and jealousy still remain?”

4

Brahmãnand Swãmi then began to supply an answer but was
unable to do so satisfactorily.

5

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Such a person lacks
intelligence. Why? Because one who is intelligent realises all of his
flaws and virtues, as well as the virtues and flaws of others. On the
other hand, one who is not intelligent only acknowledges his own
virtues, but fails to realise his drawbacks; he feels himself to be as
eminent as the Sanakãdik, and he views other eminent people to be
inferior to himself. One who is intelligent, though, realises his own
flaws; i.e., he acknowledges the fact that I possess this many flaws.
Then, maintaining an intense aversion towards those flaws, he
eradicates them. Also, if a sãdhu were to speak to him about
The Vachanãmrut

321

eradicating those flaws, he would accept that advice as beneficial. As
a result, no flaws of egotism, jealousy, etc., would remain in him. On
the other hand, someone may appear to be very intelligent, but if he
does not introspect over his own flaws, then his intelligence should be
known to be merely worldly. Outwardly, that intelligence appears to
be very sharp but he cannot be called intelligent; actually, he should
be known to be an utter fool, and his intelligence is futile for
attaining his own liberation. In comparison, someone else may
possess only a little intelligence, but if, after realising his own flaws,
he attempts to eradicate them, then even his limited intelligence is
useful in attaining liberation. In fact, only he can be called
intelligent. On the other hand, a person who never sees his own
flaws and perceives only his own virtues should be known as a fool.
However, one who acknowledges his own drawbacks should be known
to be intelligent.”
6

Thereafter, Shriji Mahãrãj instructed, “Now please sing
devotional songs.” The paramhansas then commenced singing ‘Á¬Ì
±Î… ‹˘Ëfifiı ÿÌÃÎ flı, ÂıflÌ±ı ±Î‰÷Î... ’i .

7

Following this, Shriji Mahãrãj spoke again, “Now please stop the
singing. The devotional songs that you have just sung are full of
love. While you were singing, I pondered over the nature of love and
realised that love is a great asset and to worship God with love is
commendable. After deep thought, though, I realised, ‘Love itself is
the mãyã of God.’ Why? Because if two women are casually talking
to each other, looking at each other or touching each other, then that
is a different type of love. Or if two men are talking to each other,
looking at each other or casually touching each other, then that is
also a different type of love. But if a man is looking at a woman,
embracing her, listening to her talks, enjoying her fragrance, then
the love and mental attraction he develops for her is such that that
type of love does not develop between two men. Also, if a woman is
looking at a man, embracing him, etc., then the love she develops for
him through his association – with her mind being totally attracted
towards him – is such that that type of love does not develop between
two women. Therefore, that which is the cause of the perpetuation of

i Sakhi ãj mohan deethã re, sheriye ãvtã re…

The Vachanãmrut

322

the world, and that which causes bondage and the cycle of births and
deaths, the mãyã of God, itself takes the form of love.
8

“But then I thought, ‘Sights, sounds, smells, tastes and touch
are the panchvishays.
Having regarded everything else as
perishable, if those vishays are directed only towards God, realising
Him to be the only source of ultimate bliss, then that is fine – that is
not mãyã.’ But then I thought that even that is not appropriate.
After all, if one perceives sights, sounds, smells, tastes and touch to
be better in other objects as compared to those that that are in God,
one will abandon God and will develop love for other objects. For
example, Shri Krishna Bhagwãn’s 16,100 wives, who were celestial
maidens in past lives, had asked for the following boon from Brahmã:
‘O Mahãrãj! We have experienced the touch of deities, demons and
humans, but we have not experienced the touch of God as our
husband. Therefore, please grace us so that he becomes our
husband.’ Thereupon, Brahmã said, ‘Perform austerities, God will
become your husband.’
Subsequently, they performed intense
austerities, after which Ashtãvakra Rishi and Nãrad Muni both
became pleased and granted the following boon: ‘God will become your
husband.’ In this way, by performing many austerities in other
lives, they attained Shri Krishna Bhagwãn. However, on perceiving
more beauty in Sãmb than in God, they became infatuated by Sãmb.
Therefore, it is not appropriate for one whose mind is not steady to
develop love for God through the pleasures of the vishays of the five
indriyas. But if one’s mind does remain steady, without harbouring
doubts, then it is appropriate.

9

“Moreover, one who is intelligent should develop love for God in
the following way: One should realise one’s jiva as being distinct from
the 24 elements. Then, after uprooting the vruttis of the five
indriyas that are firmly embedded in the jiva, and while remaining
as the jiva alone, devoid of the vruttis of the indriyas, one should
develop as much love for God as possible in a nirgun manner.

10

“What do I mean by nirgun? Well, the ten indriyas are the
products of rajogun; the antahkaran and their presiding deities are
the products of sattvagun, and the five bhuts and the panchvishays
are the products of tamogun. One who believes himself to be distinct
from the products of those three gunas and from the three gunas
themselves, remaining as the jiva alone, is known as nirgun. One

The Vachanãmrut

323

should become nirgun in this manner and develop love for God.
Thus, it is said:

ŸÒªÈ¸áÿSÕÊ ⁄U◊ãÃ S◊ ªÈáÊÊŸÈ∑§ÕŸ „U⁄U—H i
and

¬Á⁄UÁŸÁDÔUÃÙ˘Á¬ ŸÒªÈ¸áÿ ©U?Ê◊o£Ù∑§‹Ë‹ÿÊ–
ªÎ„UËÃøÃÊ ⁄UÊ¡·¸ •ÊÅÿÊŸ¢ ÿŒœËÃflÊŸ˜H ii
11

“Having realised the nature of the kshetra and the kshetragna,
those who possess gnãn in this manner attain ãtmã-realisation and
develop love for God. What is the kshetra? Well, the three bodies –
sthul, sukshma and kãran – and the three states – waking, dream
and deep sleep – are the kshetra. Such a person realises that kshetra
to be distinct from his own ãtmã; i.e., he feels, ‘Those can never be
any part of me; I am the knower; I am extremely pure, formless,
genderless and chetan, while the kshetra is extremely impure, jad
and perishable.’
Understanding this firmly, he who develops
vairãgya towards everything else and offers bhakti to God while
observing swadharma is known to possess ekãntik bhakti and gnãn.
Such a devotee possessing gnãn is superior to all. In fact, God has
said:

i Nairgunyasthã ramante sma gunãnukathane harehe|

[Although the munis…] had attained the nirgun state, they [still] engaged
themselves in extolling the glory of God.
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 2.1.7
ii Parinishthito’pi nairgunya uttama-shloka-leelayã|
Gruheeta-chetã rãjarshe ãkhyãnam yad-adheetavãn||
O King [Parikshit]! Despite being perfectly poised in the nirgun state, I
[Shukdevji] – having been attracted by the divine actions and incidents of God –
studied the [Shrimad Bhãgwat] epic.
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 2.1.9

The Vachanãmrut

324

Ã·Ê¢ ôÊÊŸË ÁŸàÿÿÈQ ∞∑§÷ÁQ Áfl¸Á‡ÊcÿÃ–
Á¬˝ÿÙ Á„U ôÊÊÁŸŸÙ˘àÿÕ¸◊„¢ ‚ ø ◊◊ Á¬˝ÿ—H i
©UŒÊ⁄UÊ— ‚fl¸ ∞flÒÃ ôÊÊŸË àflÊà◊Òfl ◊ ◊Ã◊˜– ii
12

“Realising this, one should uproot the indriyas, the antahkaran
and the vishays from the jiva and develop love for God – only that is
appropriate. As long as one has not uprooted them, one should
extract work from them in the form of the darshan, touch, etc., of
God. Moreover, they should not be regarded as one’s benefactors –
instead, they should be regarded as enemies. In fact, one should
never feel gratitude towards them by thinking, ‘They are beneficial to
me in offering bhakti to God’ – i.e., one should not feel that the eyes
enable one to have the darshan of God; the ears enable one to listen to
the discourses of God; the skin enables one to experience the touch of
God; the nose enables one to experience the fragrance of God’s rosary
and tulsi; the mouth enables one to engage in spiritual discourses
and sing devotional songs in praise of God; and the tongue enables
one to experience the taste of God’s prasãd, etc. One should not
understand them to be instrumental in performing bhakti of God.
They should not be given gratitude, nor should they be trusted; on
the contrary, they should be regarded only as enemies. Why?
Because, what if in the process of experiencing happiness through the
darshan, touch, etc., of God, they lure one to believe that there is
pleasure in the darshan, touch, etc., of women and other objects?
That would be detrimental. Therefore, those enemies in the form of
the five indriyas should be confined, and work in the form of bhakti
i Teshãm gnãnee nitya-yukta eka-bhaktir-vishishyate|

Priyo hi gnãnino’tyartham-aham sa cha mama priyaha||
Of these [i.e. one who is distressed from having fallen from the path of attaining
yogic powers, and thus still wishes to attain them; one who seeks knowledge of
the ãtmã, i.e. ãtmã-realisation; one who desires material objects, i.e. material
pleasures and powers; and one who has gnãn], the one with gnãn is the best
because he is always engaged in me and is devoted to me alone. I am exceedingly
dear to a person with gnãn, and he is dear to me.
Bhagwad Gitã: 7.17
ii Udãrãhã sarva evaite gnãnee tvãtmaiva me matam|
They are all indeed noble, but I consider the one with gnãn to be my very ãtmã.
Bhagwad Gitã: 7.18

The Vachanãmrut

325

to God should be extracted from them. For example, a king who has
captured his enemy keeps him chained and extracts work from him;
never does the king free him or trust him. If he were to free him or
trust him, then the enemy would definitely kill the king. In the
same way, if one trusts one’s enemies in the form of the indriyas and
frees them, not keeping them confined, they will definitely make one
fall from the path of God. Therefore, they should never be trusted.
13

“Moreover, just as the British arrest a criminal and keep him
standing in a witness box to question him, without freeing him or
trusting him, in the same way, the indriyas and the antahkaran
should be kept in a witness box and in chains in the form of the
niyams of the five religious vows4, and then they should be made to
offer bhakti to God. They should not, however, be given any
gratitude; they should be looked upon only as enemies. If they are
regarded as benefactors, realising them to be useful in bhakti, and if
they are given gratitude, then in the process of experiencing the
happiness of the darshan, touch, etc., of God, they will lure one to
believe that there is some pleasure in women and other objects. As a
result, all efforts one has made will become futile. For example, if
one spark of fire were to fall on a large pile of gunpowder, then that
gunpowder would be completely reduced to ashes. Similarly, such a
person’s stability is not certain.

14

“Therefore, it is only appropriate that one develops love for God
while behaving as the ãtmã. That is My principle, and one who
develops love for God in this way is dear to Me. Moreover, one should
think, ‘The beauty of God cannot be found anywhere else; the touch of
God cannot be found anywhere else; the fragrance of God cannot be
found anywhere else; the bliss experienced from hearing God cannot
be found anywhere else; and the tastes related to God cannot be found
anywhere else. In this way, one should tempt the indriyas and the
antahkaran, and divert them away from other vishays. Such
understanding is appropriate.”

15

Then Swayamprakãshãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, in which
place should one stay and develop all of these thoughts?”

16

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “One should think: ‘I am not the sthul
body, the sukshma body or the kãran body; I do not have the waking,
dream or deep sleep states; I am not the five gnãn-indriyas, the five
karma-indriyas, the four antahkarans or their presiding deities; in
fact, I am distinct from all of these. I am chaitanya; I am a devotee
The Vachanãmrut

326

of God.’ If the indriyas and antahkaran misbehave in some way,
they should be reprimanded in the following manner: ‘Do you wish to
see the beauty only of God, or do you also wish to see the beauty of
others? Do you wish to listen to sounds related only to God and
experience smells related to Him, or do you also wish to listen to
other sounds and experience other smells? If you do hanker after the
vishays leaving God aside, then what is there between you and me?
Who are you and who am I? I will have absolutely nothing to do with
you. Whatever you do, you will have to bear the consequences.’
Reprimanding the indriyas and antahkaran in this manner, one
should pray to God: ‘O Mahãrãj! O Swãmi! You intensely love your
devotees! You are an ocean of mercy! The fault lies with the
indriyas and antahkaran; I am distinct from them. In fact, they are
my enemies. So, please protect me from their influence.’ One should
constantly offer prayer in this manner, and understanding one’s own
kshetragna to be chaitanya, one should offer love and bhakti to God.”
|| Vachanãmrut Panchãlã-3 || 129 ||

Panchãlã-4
Perceiving Divinity in the Human Traits of God
1

On Fãgun vadi 3, Samvat 1877 [21 March 1821], Shriji Mahãrãj
was sitting on a large, decorated cot that had been placed on a
platform in Jhinãbhãi’s darbãr in Panchãlã. He was wearing a
white khes and had covered Himself with a thin, white blanket. He
had also tied a white feto around His head. In addition to this, He
was turning a rosary made of tulsi beads in His hand. At that time,
an assembly of paramhansas as well as an assembly of devotees from
various places was gathered before Him.

2

Then Shriji Mahãrãj said to the paramhansas, “Please begin a
question-answer session amongst yourselves.”

3

Thereupon Muni Bãwã asked a question to Brahmãnand Swãmi,
“Initially, one may have the conviction of God and may engage in
worship and remembrance; but later, on seeing the human-like
actions of God, doubts arise in that conviction. What is the cause of
this?”

4

Brahmãnand Swãmi then began to answer that question but
was unable to do so satisfactorily.
The Vachanãmrut

327

5

Then, having thought for some time, Shriji Mahãrãj spoke, “I
shall answer that question.” Continuing, He said, “The Vedas, the
Purãns, the Mahãbhãrat, the Smrutis and the other scriptures
proclaim that the original form of God, which is eternal, without a
beginning and divine, resides in His Akshardhãm. They also
mention what that God is like. His form is not like any form that
can be seen by the eyes. His sound is not like any sound that can be
heard by the ears. His touch is not like any touch that can be felt by
the skin. His smell is not like any smell that can be smelt by the
nose. The tongue cannot describe that God. He cannot be conceived
by the man; He cannot be contemplated upon by the chitt; He cannot
be comprehended by the buddhi, nor can the ahamkãr fully claim, ‘I
am God’s, and God is mine’. In this manner, God remains beyond
the reach of the indriyas and the antahkaran.

6

“Moreover, the beauty of that God is such that it cannot be
compared to any other object in this brahmãnd – including
everything from Brahmã to the smallest blade of grass. His sound is
such that it cannot be compared to any other sounds in this
brahmãnd. The smell of God is such that it cannot be compared to
any other smell in this brahmãnd. The touch of God is such that it
cannot be compared to any other touch in this brahmãnd. The tastes
related to God are such that they cannot be compared to any other
taste in this brahmãnd. The abode of God is such that it cannot be
compared to any other place in this brahmãnd. Specifically, out of all
of the various places in the seven dwips and the nine khands, the
extremely beautiful places of Brahmã and others on Meru, the
various places on Mount Lokãlok, the realms of Indra, Varun, Kuber,
Shiv and Brahmã, and many other places, not one can compare to
the abode of God. The bliss experienced by the devotees of God
residing in that abode is such that it cannot be compared to any other
type of bliss in this brahmãnd.

7

“The form of that God is such that it cannot be compared to the
form of anyone in this brahmãnd. Why? Because all of the forms in
this brahmãnd which evolved from Prakruti-Purush are mãyik,
whereas God is divine. So, since the two are totally different, how
can they possibly be compared? For example, we can compare a man
to something by saying, ‘This man is like a buffalo, like a snake, like
a sparrow, like a donkey, like a dog, like a crow or like an elephant.’
But in reality, such comparisons are not appropriate for humans.
Why? Because all of those animals are of a totally different category
The Vachanãmrut

328

than humans. Even between a human and a human, there is no
exact similarity whereby one can claim, ‘This person is exactly like
that person.’ If he were exactly like the other person, then how could
the original person be recognised? Therefore, despite the fact that all
humans belong to the same category, no two are exactly alike. Just
look at Bhago and Mulo – the two are said to be identical, but if one
stays with them for a few days, one can distinguish between them
and say, ‘This is Bhago and this is Mulo.’ But if there were no
difference, how could they be recognised? So, if there is no great
similarity between man and man, how can there be similarity
between that which is mãyik and that which is not mãyik? What
can possibly be compared to God and the abode of God? After all, all
scriptures claim, ‘God is beyond the reach of the indriyas and the
antahkaran.’
8

“When that God does not wish to give His darshan to beings, He
stays in that manner in His own Akshardhãm with a divine form,
thus remaining beyond reach. That God is the Lord of all lords, He
is surrounded by countless divine luxuries and countless divine
attendants, and He is the lord of countless millions of brahmãnds.
For example, suppose there is a great world-emperor whose kingdom
stretches from where the sun rises to where it sets. Also, suppose
that that emperor, by the strength of his own austerities, has
attained divine powers like those of the deities and is ruling over the
realms of swarg, Mrutyulok and pãtãl – just like Arjun, who
remained on the throne of Indra in Swarglok for many years with his
own body, and King Nahush, who also became Indra. So powerful is
this world-emperor that it is not possible to count the villages in his
kingdom, as they are innumerable. The chiefs of these villages also
cannot be counted, as they too are innumerable. Furthermore, the
countless chiefs of those villages come to his darbãr to make
requests. The emperor’s money, property, pleasures, palaces and
wealth are also countless. Similarly, God is the king of the kings of
countless villages in the form of brahmãnds. Moreover, the chiefs of
those villages in the form of brahmãnds are Brahmã, Vishnu and
Shiv. Just as in one village one chief is senior and the whole
population of that village bows before him and follows his command,
and just as the chief in turn bows before the king, similarly, in each
brahmãnd Brahmã, Vishnu and Shiv are senior, and the others in
that brahmãnd, that is the deities, demons, humans, rishis and
prajãpatis of that brahmãnd, worship them and follow their
The Vachanãmrut

329

command.
But Brahmã, Vishnu and Shiv in turn worship
Purushottam Bhagwãn and follow His command. Furthermore, all
of the Brahmãs, Vishnus and Maheshes of all of the brahmãnds pray
to God: ‘Mahãrãj! Please have compassion on us and visit our
brahmãnd’ – just as the chief of a village requests the world-emperor,
‘Mahãrãj! I am poor. Please visit my house. I shall serve You to the
best of my ability.’ In the same way, Brahmã, Vishnu and Shiv pray
to that God, ‘Mahãrãj! Please have mercy upon us and grace us with
Your darshan; do visit our brahmãnd.’ Only then does God assume a
body in that brahmãnd.
9

“Moreover, He assumes a body based on the task to be performed
there, and He also behaves accordingly. If He assumes the body of a
deity, then He behaves exactly like a deity. If He assumes the body
of an animal, then He behaves exactly like an animal. For example,
when God assumed the form of Varãh, He found the earth by
smelling it. When He became Hayagriv, He started to neigh like a
horse. When He assumed the bodies of water creatures such as
Matsya and Kachchha, He moved only in water, but not on land.
When He became the form of Nrusinh, He behaved exactly like a
lion, not like a human.

10

“When that God assumes the form of a human being, He
behaves exactly like a human. During Satya-yug, the lifespan of
humans is 100,000 years, and thus God also lives for 100,000 years.
Moreover, just as the people in Satya-yug can indulge in any object
their mind desires, God also indulges in objects in the same manner,
but He does not behave in any extraordinary way. Also, as the
lifespan of humans in Tretã-yug is 10,000 years, when God is born in
Tretã-yug, He also lives for that many years. The lifespan in
Dwãpar-yug is 1,000 years, and humans possess the strength of
10,000 elephants; thus, God also possesses the same strength and has
the same lifespan. When God is born in Kali-yug, He assumes the
lifespan and strength of humans according to the norms of Kali-yug.
Moreover, just as a child is conceived, then develops in the womb,
then is born, then undergoes the phases of childhood, youth and old
age, and eventually dies, God also undergoes the same process,
exactly like a human.

11

“Further, just as humans possess swabhãvs such as lust, anger,
avarice, cravings for taste, egotism, affection, arrogance, matsar,
jealousy, enmity, attachment, infatuation, happiness, misery, fear,
The Vachanãmrut

330

fearlessness, bravery, cowardice, hunger, thirst, desires, cravings,
sleep, prejudice, a feeling that this belongs to others, a feeling that
this belongs to me, renunciation, detachment, etc., in the same way,
all of those swabhãvs are apparent in God as well when He assumes
a human body. All of the scriptures have also described that human
form of God along with His original, divine form. One who has
developed a firm conviction of both of those forms through intense
shravan and manan, never harbours doubts in any way; whereas one
who lacks this type of understanding does harbour doubts in God.
12

“When that God – who possesses a divine form – assumes a
human body, He behaves with swabhãvs similar to humans.
However, one who is intelligent realises, ‘He possesses lust, but it is
not like that of other humans. In fact, anger, avarice, cravings for
taste, egotism and other human swabhãvs are also present in God,
but they certainly are not like those possessed by other humans.’ An
intelligent person realises that there is something divine about that
God, and with this understanding, he develops the conviction of Him
being God. For example, Shankarãchãrya entered the body of a king
in order to gain knowledge of certain amorous details. Thus, at that
time, his bodily gestures and his emotions were all amorous like
those of the king. The queen, however, was intelligent and realised,
‘My husband did not possess such powers; therefore, some other jiva
has entered his body.’ In the same manner, divinity is apparent in
God in human form. As a result, one develops the conviction of Him
being God.

13

“Then you may say, ‘If someone develops the conviction of God on
noticing something divine, then if He were to display much divinity,
many people would develop such conviction.’ But the fact of the
matter is as follows: All of the scriptures refer to the sun by saying,
‘It is God.’ Moreover, that sun is visible to everyone, and people do its
darshan daily. Despite this, no person has ever been convinced of his
or her own liberation as a result of its darshan; i.e., they do not
believe, ‘I have attained liberation.’ On the other hand, after having
the darshan of Rãm, Krishna, and the other avatãrs in human form;
and of Nãrad, Shuk and other sãdhus, people do attain the conviction
that my liberation is certainly guaranteed, and I am fulfilled. Even
though there is no divine light in that God and those sãdhus – in
fact, only after lighting an oil lamp can one have their darshan –
still, one becomes convinced of one’s own liberation.
The Vachanãmrut

331

14

“Consider another example: Fire is also a visible form of God, as
God has said,

•„¢ flÒEÊŸ⁄UÙ ÷ÍàflÊ ¬ÊÁáÊŸÊ¢ Œ„U◊ÊÁüÊÃ—–
¬˝ÊáÊÊ¬ÊŸ‚◊ÊÿÈQ — ¬øÊêÿÛÊ¢ øÃÈÁfl¸œ◊˜H i
The darshan of that fire is available to all, but that does not grant
people conviction of their own liberation, whereas with the darshan of
God and His sãdhu, they do gain conviction of their own liberation.
The reason for this is that there is a disparity between humans, and
the sun and fire; as a result, one is not convinced of one’s liberation
upon having the darshan of the sun or fire. On the contrary, if
someone touches fire, he will be burnt. Furthermore, when Kuntãji
invoked Surya using the mantra given by Durvãsã, Surya came to
Kuntãji in a human form just like Kuntãji’s own form. As a result,
she was able to enjoy his intimacy and thus conceived Karna. In
actuality, Surya is extremely luminous; if he had come with all of his
light, Kuntãji would have been burnt to death, and she would not
have been able to enjoy his intimacy. Also, when Surya used to come
to Satrãjit Yãdav, he came as a human. But when he came to
Kuntãji and came to Satrãjit, did he leave his place in the sky? In
reality, he did remain in the sky; but assuming another form, that
very same Surya came to Kuntãji and Satrãjit. Moreover, there was
just as much luminosity in that form as there is in the sun, but he
suppressed that luminosity and came as a human. In the same way,
if God were to give darshan to beings with all of His divinity, then
humans would not find it suitable, and they would wonder, ‘Is this a
ghost, or what?’ Therefore, God suppresses His own divine powers
and gives darshan exactly like a human. But at the same time, He
still remains present in His own abode. Only when God comes as a
human are people able to do His darshan, touch Him, and offer the
nine types of bhakti.
i Aham vaishvãnaro bhootvã prãninãm deham-ãshritaha|

Prãnãpãna-samãyuktaha pachãmyannam chaturvidham||
Abiding in the bodies of all beings as Vaishvãnar [the fire of digestion], I digest
the four types of food [i.e. chewable, drinkable, lickable and suckable] with the
help of prãn vãyu [i.e. inhaled air] and apãn vãyu [i.e. air that pushes food
downwards].
Bhagwad Gitã: 15.14

The Vachanãmrut

332

15

“If God does not become like a human and instead behaves with
complete divinity, then people would not be able to develop affection or
feelings of affinity for Him. Why? Because a human develops
affection and affinity for another human, animals develop mutual
affection and affinity for other animals, but humans and animals do
not develop the same affection and affinity for each other. Why?
Because those belonging to the same category develop affection
towards each other, but not towards those belonging to different
categories. Similarly, God suppresses His divinity and becomes
exactly like a human so that His devotees can develop affection for
Him. He does not exhibit His divinity. His exhibiting divinity would
place Him in a different category, and as a result, devotees would not
be able to develop affection and affinity towards Him. It is for this
reason that when God appears in human form, He remains
extremely wary to ensure the concealment of His own divinity. If, in
the process, He were to become a little impatient in some task, His
divinity would become apparent. Occasionally, though, by His own
wish, He may reveal His divinity to some devotee. For example,
when Shri Krishna Bhagwãn became impatient to kill Bhishma, he
forgot his human-like nature and reverted to his divine powers. As a
result, the earth was incapable of bearing the burden. When he
revealed his divinity to Arjun, it was revealed as a result of his own
wish. However, Arjun did not experience bliss due to that divinity; in
fact, he became very uneasy. Then, when Shri Krishna Bhagwãn
gave darshan to Arjun in his human form, Arjun experienced bliss
and said:

ŒCÔU˜flŒ¢ ◊ÊŸÈ·¢ M§¬¢ Ãfl ‚ıêÿ¢ ¡ŸÊŒ¸Ÿ–
ßŒÊŸË◊ÁS◊ ‚¢flÎ?Ê— ‚øÃÊ— ¬˝∑Î§ÁÃ¢ ªÃ—H i
16

“Therefore, only when God behaves like a human does a person
find it suitable; otherwise he would not. Yet, when God behaves as a
human, one who does not have such understanding would find it
difficult to accept His human-like nature. Moreover, if He were to
i Drushtvedam mãnusham roopam tava saumyam janãrdana|

Idãneem-asmi samvruttaha sachetãhã prakrutim gataha||
O Vanquisher of the Evil [Krishna]! Having seen your gentle human form, I am
now composed and have been restored to my original nature.
Bhagwad Gitã: 11.51

The Vachanãmrut

333

behave with only divinity, one would be unable to comprehend that
which is beyond the reach of the mind and speech. Hence, the
scriptures have described God in both ways. One who has fully
realised Him in this manner would not develop any doubts; but,
doubts would certainly arise in one who does not understand in this
manner.
17

“Now someone may claim, ‘I have realised God, and I have the
conviction of God.’ But if he has not understood this discourse, then
his conviction is still imperfect. For example, a person may have
learnt a verse or a devotional song. If he were asked, ‘Have you
learnt this verse or this devotional song?’ he would reply that he has,
and he would also be able to recite it. But if he were to forget that
verse or devotional song after a few days, then it can be said that
when he originally learnt the verse, he had not learnt it properly.
Why? Because that verse or devotional song was not fully imprinted
in his jiva through intense practice, and through shravan and
manan. However, if something is learnt in childhood thoroughly,
then it can be recalled when required even during youth or old age.
In the same way, when that person attempted to develop the
conviction of God, some deficiencies remained. If no deficiencies had
remained, and if he had done shravan, manan and intense reiteration
in his jiva, then he would never have had any doubts at all.”
|| Vachanãmrut Panchãlã-4 || 130 ||

Panchãlã-5
Where Is Conceit Appropriate,
and Where Is Humility Appropriate?
1

On Fãgun vadi 8, Samvat 1877 [27 March 1821], Shriji Mahãrãj
was sitting on a large, decorated cot that had been placed on a
platform in Jhinãbhãi’s darbãr in Panchãlã. He was wearing a
white khes and a warm, red dagli. He had also tied a white feto
around His head. In addition to this, He had covered Himself with a
white cotton cloth. At that time, an assembly of paramhansas as
well as devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Swayamprakãshãnand Swãmi asked a question:
“When is conceit appropriate, and when is it not appropriate? When
is humility appropriate, and when is it not appropriate?”
The Vachanãmrut

334

3

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “It is appropriate to be conceited before
one who spites Satsang, or speaks derogatorily of God or His great
Sant. If a person does speak derogatorily, one should retaliate with
words as sharp as an arrow, but in no way should one become
humble before a non-believer. In such situations, that is appropriate.
On the other hand, it is not appropriate to be conceited before God or
His Sant. Before them, putting conceit aside, behaving as a servant
of servants and becoming humble is the only appropriate behaviour.”
|| Vachanãmrut Panchãlã-5 || 131 ||

Panchãlã-6
Those with Firm Upãsanã Attain Liberation
1

On the night of Fãgun vadi 9, Samvat 1877 [28 March 1821],
Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot that had been
placed on a platform in Jhinãbhãi’s darbãr in Panchãlã. He was
wearing a warm, red dagli along with a white angarkhu. He had
also tied a white feto around His head. In addition to this, He was
wearing a white khes and had covered Himself with a white blanket.
At that time, an assembly of paramhansas as well as devotees from
various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “I thought for quite some time
and having mentally skimmed through all of the scriptures, it
became apparent that there has not been any avatãr as powerful as
Shri Krishna. Why? Because Shri Krishna has, within himself,
exhibited in various ways the characteristics of all of the other
countless forms of himself. How? Firstly, after Devki gave birth to
him, he gave darshan in a four-armed form holding a conch, a disc, a
mace and a lotus, thereby revealing in himself the characteristics of
the husband of Lakshmi, Vaikunthnãth. To his mother Yashodã, he
showed the Vishwarup form in his own mouth, thereby revealing the
characteristics of Aniruddha in himself through his thousand-headed
form. He gave darshan to Akrur in the river Yamunã, thereby
revealing the characteristics of Shesh-shãyi.
He showed the
Vishwarup form to Arjun on the battlefield: ‘¬‡ÿ ◊ ¬ÊÕ¸ M§¬ÊÁáÊ

The Vachanãmrut

335

‡ÊÃ‡ÊÙ˘Õ ‚„Ud‡Ê—– ’i.

There, he showed countless brahmãnds and
revealed the characteristics of Purushottam. Moreover, Shri Krishna
himself has said:

ÿS◊ÊàˇÊ⁄U◊ÃËÃÙ˘„U◊ˇÊ⁄UÊŒÁ¬ øÙ?Ê◊—–
•ÃÙ˘ÁS◊ ‹Ù∑§ flŒ ø ¬˝ÁÕÃ— ¬ÈL§·Ù?Ê◊—H ii
Thereby, he revealed himself as Purushottam. Also, he himself was
the Shri Krishna who resides in Golok with Rãdhikã. When he went
to retrieve the Brãhmin’s son, he gave darshan to Arjun as BhumãPurush. It was Vãsudev – who resides in Shwetdwip – who himself
assumed that avatãr. Moreover, throughout the Mahãbhãrat and the
Shrimad Bhãgwat, Narnãrãyan has been referred to as that Shri
Krishna himself. Therefore, the forms, strength and divine powers of
that same God residing in that avatãr of Shri Krishna in various
ways are complete. Thus, that avatãr was very great. After all,
other forms possessed a few divine powers, whereas he was replete
with all divine powers. Therefore, there is no avatãr like the avatãr
of Krishna; that avatãr reigns as supreme. Only some powers have
been revealed through the other avatãrs. This Avatãr, however, has
revealed all divine powers and strength. Therefore, this Avatãr is the
greatest of all.
3

“If one has a firm conviction of the manifest form of Shri
Krishna in this manner, and if that realisation never changes in any
way, then even if one happens to commit a slip of conduct due to the
influence of bad company, one would not fall from the path of
liberation; one would certainly attain liberation. Therefore, if all of
you paramhansas and devotees also cultivate such firmness of the
upãsanã of God in this way, then if you happen to commit a slight
slip of conduct, you will still ultimately attain liberation.”

i Pashya me pãrth roopãni shatasho’tha sahasrashaha|

O Son of Pruthã [Arjun]! Behold my hundreds and thousands of [divine] forms.
Bhagwad Gitã: 11.5
ii Yasmãt-ksharam-ateeto’ham-aksharãd-api chottamaha|
Ato’smi loke vede cha prathitaha purushottamha||
I transcend all that is perishable and am greater than even the imperishable;
therefore I am known in the Smrutis and Vedas as ‘Purushottam’.
Bhagwad Gitã: 15.18

The Vachanãmrut

336

4

Hearing this discourse, all of the sãdhus and devotees realised
Shriji Mahãrãj as the cause of all, thus strengthening their upãsanã.
|| Vachanãmrut Panchãlã-6 || 132 ||

Panchãlã-7
The ‘Mãyã’ of a Magician
1

About an hour-and-a-half after sunrise on Fãgun vadi 11,
Samvat 1877 [29 March 1821], Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large,
decorated cot that had been placed on a platform in Jhinãbhãi’s
darbãr in Panchãlã. He was wearing a warm, red dagli and a white
khes. He had also tied a white feto around His head. In addition to
this, He had covered Himself with a thin, white blanket. At that
time, an assembly of paramhansas as well as an assembly of devotees
from various places had gathered before Him.

2

In the assembly, Shriji Mahãrãj had Nityãnand Swãmi read a
passage from the first canto of the Shrimad Bhãgwat. In the
beginning, Nityãnand Swãmi explained the verse ‘¡ã◊ÊlSÿ ÿÃÙ...H’i .

3

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj Himself began to explain the meaning
of one of the other parts of that verse, ‘ÿòÊ ÁòÊ‚ªÙ¸ ◊Î·Ê’: “One should
realise that the entities evolved out of the three gunas of mãyã,
namely the five bhuts, the indriyas, the antahkaran and their
presiding deities are never present in God at any time – past, present
or future. Also, one should interpret the other part of that verse,
‘œÊêŸÊ SflŸ ‚ŒÊ ÁŸ⁄USÃ∑È§„U∑¢§,’ as follows: God, via His own form –
‘dhãm’ ii – destroyed the deception in the form of the products of
mãyã; such is the supremely satya form of God. Moreover, just as
the form of God in Akshardhãm is resplendent with countless divine
powers and divine light at the end of ãtyantik-pralay, one should

i Janmãdyasya yato’nvayad-itaratash-chãrtheshvabhignaha svarãt

Tene brahma hrudã ya ãdikavaye muhyanti yat-soorayaha|
Tejo-vãri-mrudãm yathã vinimayo yatra trisargo mrushã
Dhãmnã svena sadã nirastakuhakam satyam param dheemahi||
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 1.1.1
ii Here ‘dhãm’ should be interpreted to mean ‘divine light’.

The Vachanãmrut

337

realise exactly the same regarding the manifest God in human form.
One who realises this is said to have known God perfectly.
4

”However, when a foolish person looks at that manifest form of
God with a mãyik vision, he perceives a human like himself. Also,
just as he himself is born, becomes a child, becomes a youth, becomes
old and dies, in the same way, he believes God to undergo the same
process. But when one worships God with sincerity, having faith in
the words of the Ekãntik Sant of God, one’s mãyik vision disappears.
Thereafter, one realises that same form of God as being the supreme
chaitanya, characterised by eternal existence, consciousness and
bliss. The Shrimad Bhãgwat also mentions:

‚ flŒ œÊÃÈ— ¬ŒflË¥ ¬⁄USÿ ŒÈ⁄UãÃflËÿ¸Sÿ ⁄UÕÊæU˜ª¬ÊáÊ—–
ÿÙ˘◊ÊÿÿÊ ‚¢ÃÃÿÊŸÈflÎ?ÿÊ ÷¡Ã Ãà¬ÊŒ‚⁄UÙ¡ªãœ◊˜H i
5

“The phases of childhood, youth and old age apparent in God, as
well as His birth and death are all perceived due to His yogic powers
of creating an illusion.
In reality, God remains absolutely
unchanged. For example, an adept magician arms himself with
weapons and ascends to the sky to fight against the warriors of the
demons – the enemies of Indra. Then, having been cut to pieces, he
falls to the ground. Thereafter, the magician’s wife gathers those
pieces together and burns herself on his funeral pyre. After a short
while, the magician appears out of the sky, armed with weapons,
exactly as he appeared before. He then asks the king for a reward
and requests, ‘Please return my wife.’ Having seen such an
astonishing performance, if one is unable to comprehend the ‘mãyã’ of
even a magician, how then can the yogic powers of God possibly be
comprehended?
One who does comprehend the ‘mãyã’ of the
magician realises: ‘That magician has not died, nor has he been
burnt; in reality, he is exactly the same as he was before.’ In a
similar manner, one who is said to have realised the form of God
i Sa veda dhãtuhu padaveem parasya duranta-veeryasya rathãnga-pãnehe|

Yo’mãyayã santatayãnuvruttyã bhajeta tat-pãda-saroja-gandham||
He who, having become free from mãyã, serves the holy feet of God while
constantly observing his wishes, realises [i.e. attains] the state of God [i.e. the
highest state of liberation] – who holds a disc in his hand, has infinite powers,
and is the transcendental supporter of the universe.
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 1.3.38

The Vachanãmrut

338

perfectly understands God to be eternal and imperishable – absolutely
unchanging. For example, when Shri Krishna Bhagwãn left his
body, Rukmini and the other wives of God took his body and burnt
themselves along with him. At that time, the ignorant thought,
‘Now he is dead.’ On the other hand, those who possessed gnãn
thought, ‘He has disappeared from here and has manifested
elsewhere.’ They understood God as being eternal. Thus, Shri
Krishna himself has said:

•fl¡ÊŸÁãÃ ◊Ê¢ ◊Í…UÊ ◊ÊŸÈ·Ë¥ ÃŸÈ◊ÊÁüÊÃ◊˜–
¬⁄¢ ÷Êfl◊¡ÊŸãÃÙ ◊◊ ÷ÍÃ◊„UE⁄U◊˜H i
6

“So, if a fool understands God as having a form, then he
understands Him as being merely like a human; or he understands
God as being formless so that He is not considered mãyik like other
mãyik forms. In this manner, a fool misunderstands on both
accounts.

7

“But if God did not have a form then what about the fact that
the Shrutis have said that during ãtyantik-pralay, ‘‚ ∞ÒˇÊÃ,’ii
meaning, ‘That God saw…’. If God ‘saw’, then He had to have a
form, possessing eyes, ears, and other organs. Moreover, it is said:
‘¬ÈL§·áÊÊà◊÷ÍÃŸ flËÿ¸◊Êœ?Ê flËÿ¸flÊŸ˜H’iii ; i.e., that Purushottam became the
form of Purush and impregnated mãyã with virility. Therefore, God
has always had a form.

8

“Moreover, when that Purushottam Nãrãyan takes the form of
Purush for some task, that Purush is eclipsed by the divine light of
Purushottam, and only Purushottam remains. In the same way,
when Purushottam takes the form of mãyã, mãyã is also eclipsed by
the divine light of Purushottam, and only God remains in that form.
Then God takes the form of mahattattva, then the forms of others
i Avajãnanti mãm moodhã mãnusheem tanum-ãshritam|

Param bhãvam-ajãnanto mama bhoota-maheshvaram||
Fools deride me as having a human form, but they do not realise my
transcendental form as the great lord of all beings.
ii Sa aikshata
Aitareya Upanishad: 1.1.1
iii Purushenãtma-bhootena veeryam-ãdhatta veeryavãn||
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 3.5.26

The Vachanãmrut

339

evolved from mahattattva, then the form of Virãt – the entity evolved
from those elements – then the form of Brahmã and others created
from that Virãt-Purush, and then the form of Nãrad and the
Sanakãdik.
In this manner, in whomever that Purushottam
Bhagwãn ‘enters’ for the purpose of fulfilling many types of tasks, He
eclipses that entity by His own divine light and He Himself reigns
supreme through that entity. Moreover, in whomever He resides, He
suppresses their own light and manifests His own divine light – just
as when fire enters iron, it suppresses the quality of coldness and the
black colour of the iron and exhibits its own quality. Also, when the
sun rises, the light from all of the stars, the moon, etc., merges into
its own light, and only the sun’s light remains. In the same way, in
whomever God ‘enters’, He overpowers their light and exhibits His
own divine light to a greater degree. Then, after completing the task
for which He had ‘entered’ that entity, He separates from it.
Thereafter, the other entity remains as he was before. Thus, the
additional powers that that entity appeared to have should be known
to actually be Purushottam Bhagwãn’s powers.
9

“In this way, the manifest form of Purushottam Nãrãyan is the
cause of all; He is forever divine and has a form. One should not
perceive any type of imperfections in that form – it is like a murti
made of sãkar. Furthermore, one should meditate on, worship, and
offer bhakti only to the form that one has seen. Furthermore,
whichever human traits seem apparent in that God should be
understood to be like the ‘mãyã’ of a magician. One who has such an
understanding does not develop any form of delusion for that God in
any way.

10

“These facts can be understood by one with the following firm
conviction: ‘Even at the time of ãtyantik-pralay, God and His devotees
remain in Akshardhãm, where the devotees enjoy divine bliss, having
attained a divine and definite form. Moreover, the form of that God
and the forms of the devotees of God possess divine light that is
equivalent to the light of countless suns and moons.’ Only one with
such firm understanding is able to understand this fact.

11

“Also, it is to liberate the jivas and to allow those jivas to offer
the nine types of bhakti to Him that that God – who has a luminous
and divine form – becomes like a human out of compassion, always
doing so with all of His strength, divine powers and attendants.
Even then, those who realise this esoteric truth understand the
The Vachanãmrut

340

human form of God on this earth as being exactly the same as the
form of God residing in Akshardhãm – they do not feel that there is
even a slight difference between that form and this form. One who
has known God in this way can be said to have known God perfectly.
For him, mãyã can be said to have been eradicated. One who realises
this is called a devotee with gnãn and an ekãntik bhakta. Moreover,
if, by chance, a person possessing such firm upãsanã of the manifest
form of God – never harbouring any doubts of mãyã being present in
the form of God – were to behave unbecomingly due to the influence
of bad company or due to the influence of his own prãrabdha karmas,
even then he would attain liberation. On the other hand, one who
has doubts in realising God in this way, even if he is a staunch,
urdhvaretã brahmachãri and a great renunciant, attaining liberation
would still be extremely difficult for him.
12

“If a person has, from the beginning, developed a firm conviction
that God possesses a form even at the end of ãtyantik-pralay, and if
he were to listen to scriptures describing God as being merely full of
divine light and formless, or if he were to hear such talks from
someone, even then he would not harbour doubts. Why? Because he
has realised, ‘God eternally possesses a form and is never formless.
Furthermore, that very God assumes the forms of Ram, Krishna,
etc.’ One with such firm understanding should be known to have
perfect conviction.”

13

In this manner, for the purpose of enlightening His devotees,
Shriji Mahãrãj talked about the unparalleled conviction of His own
form.
On hearing this, all of the paramhansas and devotees
strengthened their faith in Shriji Mahãrãj’s form as described.
|| Vachanãmrut Panchãlã-7 || 133 ||

|| End of Panchãlã Section ||

The Vachanãmrut

341

GADHADÃ II SECTION
Gadhadã II-1
The Cause of Infatuation
1

On Jyeshtha sudi Punam, Samvat 1877 [15 June 1821], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on the veranda outside the
west-facing rooms in front of the mandir of Shri Vãsudevnãrãyan in
Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was wearing a white khes
and had covered Himself with a white cotton cloth. He had also tied
a white pãgh around His head and was wearing a garland of white
flowers. At that time, some of the paramhansas were singing
devotional songs to the accompaniment of a jhãnjh and mrudang,
while munis as well as devotees from various places had gathered
before Him in an assembly.

2

Shriji Mahãrãj then said to the paramhansas who were singing
devotional songs, “Please stop singing for the time being and conduct
a question-answer session.”

3

Thereupon Muktãnand Swãmi bowed to Shriji Mahãrãj with
folded hands and asked, “Mahãrãj, what is the nature of infatuation?
Also, by what means can infatuation be eliminated?”

4

After thinking for a short while, Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “It
seems that a feeling of delusion which often appears in the mind is
the very nature of infatuation. When infatuation intensifies in a
person’s heart, the delusion in his mind also intensifies. Thereafter,
he loses all sense of discrimination of what should be done and what
should not be done.

5

“In fact, just today, I was thinking about the reason behind such
infatuation developing. Last night, I awoke in the middle of the
night and slept facing north. Upon seeing the Dhruv Star, the
following thought arose: ‘This is the northern Dhruv, but the
scriptures also mention a southern Dhruv. Where could that be?’
Thereafter, I looked for the southern Dhruv and I saw it as well.
Just as there is a pulley for drawing water from a well, I saw a
similar large pulley between the two Dhruv stars. The tips of the
two supports of the wheel were touching the Dhruv stars, just as
wooden pillars are held up by iron rods hammered between them.
The Vachanãmrut

342

Also, just as a rope is wound around a rope-wheel which is studded
with brass ornaments, similarly, I saw the positions of all of the
stars, the deities, the nine planets, etc., arranged around that ropewheel. I also saw the sun and the moon rise and set from the same
direction. Then looking within, I saw that all things that are in the
brahmãnd – Dhruv, etc. – are also all in the body. I saw the
kshetragna that resides in the body. I also saw Purushottam
Bhagwãn, who resides within that kshetragna. On seeing that God,
My vrutti became deeply engrossed in His form – so much so that
returning out of samãdhi seemed impossible. But then, a devotee
came near and prayed to Me. It was only out of compassion that I
was able to return into this body.
6

“Then, the following thought arose in My mind: ‘I was able to
return from samãdhi due to compassion, but what could be the
reason for others coming out of samãdhi?’ It seemed to Me that they
come out of samãdhi because attachment for some vishays still
remains.

7

“Therefore, the panchvishays are the cause of infatuation.
Moreover, there are three grades of those vishays – superior, average
and inferior. Of these, if a person who has obtained superior vishays
encounters someone who obstructs him from them, then that person
becomes angry on the latter. From that anger, infatuation develops.

8

“Generally, the ears have a constant relationship with sounds.
The skin has a constant relationship with touch. In this way, the
five gnãn-indriyas are related to the vishays. Therefore, if a person
who has casually seen an object wishes to break his vrutti from that
object and keep it focused on the form of God instead, then no effort is
required; his vrutti would become detached quite easily from the
vishays and remain on the form of God. On the other hand, if a
person has seen an extremely charming object – such as a woman –
and his vrutti has become fixed on that, then even if he attempts to
keep his vrutti on God’s form, it will not stay there. Nor will his
chitt remain steady. Thus, as long as the chitt is attracted by
alluring vishays, infatuation cannot be eradicated. Moreover, if the
Sant or one’s guru or one’s Ishtadev – God – should criticise a vishay
towards which one’s chitt has been lured, one would become upset
with them and even malign them; one would not be able to accept
their words. Such an experience in one’s heart should be known as
infatuation. Moreover, God has said in the Gitã:
The Vachanãmrut

343

äÿÊÿÃÙ Áfl·ÿÊã¬È¢‚— ‚æU˜ªSÃ·Í¬¡ÊÿÃ–
‚æU˜ªÊà‚TÊÿÃ ∑§Ê◊— ∑§Ê◊Êà∑˝§ÙœÙ˘Á÷¡ÊÿÃH
∑˝§ÙœÊjflÁÃ ‚¢◊Ù„U— ‚¢◊Ù„UÊàS◊ÎÁÃÁfl÷˝◊—–
S◊ÎÁÃ÷˝¢‡ÊÊiÈÁhŸÊ‡ÊÙ ’ÈÁhŸÊ‡ÊÊà¬˝áÊ‡ÿÁÃH i
These words spoken by Shri Krishna Bhagwãn are universal
principles. When the chitt is attracted to vishays such as sounds,
touch, etc., no matter how intelligent one may be, one’s buddhi
becomes unstable and one becomes like an animal. Thus, infatuation
is generated due to attachment to the vishays.
9

“Now, a person who wishes to detach his chitt from those
vishays should firstly consolidate his knowledge of the ãtmã; i.e., ‘I
am the ãtmã, not this body.’ Secondly, he should thoroughly
understand the nature of how the cosmos is created, sustained and
destroyed. Thirdly, he should thoroughly understand the greatness
of God. He should think, ‘The panchvishays have been created by
God; thus, there must be much more bliss in God than there is in
them. How is that? Well, sounds contain only pleasures related to
sounds; the pleasures of the other four types of vishays cannot be
found in sounds. In the same way, only the pleasures of touch, and
no other vishays can be found in touch. Similarly, only the pleasures
of sight exist in sights. The same applies for tastes and smells in
that only their own respective pleasures exist, but the pleasures of all
of the panchvishays cannot be experienced in just one vishay.

10

“On the other hand, in God, all pleasures exist simultaneously.
Thus, even if a devotee does only darshan, he still feels totally
fulfilled. Similarly, touch and other types of contact with God also
i Dhyãyato vishayãn -punsaha sangas-teshoopajãyate|

Sangãt-sanjãyate kãmaha kãmãt-krodho’bhijãyate||
Krodhãd-bhavati sammohaha sammohãt-smruti-vibhramaha|
Smruti-bhranshãd-buddhi-nãsho buddhi-nãshat-pranashyati||
A person contemplating on the sense objects develops attachment towards them.
From the attachment develop desires; from desires develops anger; from anger
develops delusion; from delusion develops confusion of the mind; from confusion
of the mind develops loss of buddhi; and as a result of such loss of buddhi, he
perishes.
Bhagwad Gitã: 2.62 & 63

The Vachanãmrut

344

make His devotees feel totally fulfilled. Moreover, whereas the
worldly pleasures related to vishays are all perishable, the bliss
related to God is everlasting. Such thoughts of the greatness of God
should be consolidated. So, attachment to the vishays is eradicated
through these three types of thoughts.
11

“When attachment to the vishays is eradicated, a person no
longer makes distinctions between pleasant and unpleasant vishays –
an ugly woman appears the same as a beautiful woman. In the same
manner, he sees everything – animals, wood, dung, stones and gold –
to be the same; he is not infatuated on seeing a pleasant object. This
is how he views the panchvishays; no distinctions between
pleasantness and unpleasantness remain in his mind. One who
behaves like this is known to be free of infatuation. Shri Krishna
Bhagwãn has also mentioned this in the Gitã: ‘‚◊‹ÙCÔÊU‡◊∑§Ê@Ÿ—...’i . A
person with such characteristics has realised God perfectly. Only he
is called a staunch devotee. Only he should be known to have an
inclination like that of a woman who observes the vow of fidelity, and
only he should be known to possess gnãn. Also, God becomes pleased
only upon him. Such a devotee is extremely dear to God; that is why
God has said in the Gitã:

Á¬˝ÿÙ Á„U ôÊÊÁŸŸÙ˘àÿÕ¸◊„¢ ‚ ø ◊◊ Á¬˝ÿ—H ii
So, only such devotees of God who have an inclination like that of a
woman who observes the vow of fidelity are extremely dear to God.
Moreover, it is not as if such an inclination is only acquired by one
who is clever; rather, it is acquired by all those who have an intense
yearning – just like in the world, naïve wives may be faithful, while
shrewd wives may be unfaithful. Thus, whether one is shrewd or
naïve is of no significance. Rather, it is those who have an intense
yearning for liberation that keep such an inclination and offer bhakti
to God.
i Sama-loshtãshma-kãnchanaha…

He who… regards a lump of earth, a stone and [a piece of] gold as equal…[is said
to be gunãtit].
Bhagwad Gitã: 14.22-25
ii Priyo hi gnãnino’tyartham-aham sa cha mama priyaha||
I am exceedingly dear to a person with gnãn, and he is dear to me.
Bhagwad Gitã: 7.17

The Vachanãmrut

345

12

“However, the state in which one views pleasant and unpleasant
vishays as equal in such a manner and becomes free of infatuation
cannot be attained in just one day. Such an achievement cannot be
accomplished so hastily; only one who attempts to do so gradually
and earnestly accomplishes it. Take, for example, a stone placed on
the edge of a well. Due to the constant drawing of water with a rope,
after a long period of time the rope causes a groove to form in the
stone, despite the rope being soft. On the other hand, even if an iron
chain were to be used to draw the water, such a groove would not
form immediately. Therefore, those who wish to strive for liberation
should eradicate attachment to the vishays. They should not become
frustrated or upset. This is also mentioned in the Gitã:

•Ÿ∑§¡ã◊‚¢Á‚hSÃÃÙ ÿÊÁÃ ¬⁄UÊ¢ ªÁÃ◊˜H i
13

“Thus, one should think, ‘I will eradicate as much attachment to
the vishays as is possible in this life, and if in the process, some
attachment still remains, then it can be eradicated in a future life.
Moreover, since I am a devotee of God, I do not desire to enter the
cycle of births and deaths.’ In this way, a devotee should keep
courage and persevere to gradually uproot infatuation.

14

“As long as pleasant and unpleasant vishays do not appear to be
equal, a devotee of God is said to be in the process of God-realisation.
When they do appear to be equal, that devotee should be known to
have attained God-realisation.
When one relinquishes one’s
attachment to vishays and attains God-realisation, one should be
known to have become fulfilled. This is the very essence of all of the
scriptures, i.e., the Vedas, the Shãstras, the Purãns, the Itihãs, etc.
Furthermore, this discourse which I have delivered before you is the
fundamental principle of all of the scriptures. Thus, all devotees
should firmly imbibe it in their lives.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-1 || 134 ||

i Aneka-janma-sansiddhas-tatoh yãti parãm gatim||

[A yogi who…] has become realised after many lives attains the highest state of
enlightenment.
Bhagwad Gitã: 6.45

The Vachanãmrut

346

Gadhadã II-2
A Small Streamlet of Water
1

On Shrãvan sudi 3, Samvat 1878 [1 August 1821], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a small, silken, embroidered
cloth in front of the mandir of Shri Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã
Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white
clothes. At that time, some munis were singing devotional songs to
the accompaniment of a jhãnjh and mrudang, while other munis as
well as devotees from various places had gathered before Him in an
assembly.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Please stop singing as I wish to
speak to you.” So saying, Shriji Mahãrãj began, “One who wishes to
attain ultimate liberation and aspires to become a sãdhu like Nãrad
and the Sanakãdik should think, ‘In this body resides the jiva, and
the indriyas and antahkaran have attached themselves to that jiva.
They have also attached themselves externally to the panchvishays.
However, due to ignorance, the jiva believes those indriyas and the
antahkaran to be its own form, whereas in actual fact, it is distinct
from them. The vishays are also distinct from the antahkaran, but
because of constant association with them, they appear to have
become one with the antahkaran.

3

“In fact, the desire to indulge in the vishays actually arises
because of the indriyas, not because of the antahkaran. For example,
extreme heat or cold first comes into contact with the outer indriyas,
and then enters the body via those indriyas. In other words, it is not
generated from within; it is generated outside and then enters
within. In the same manner, desires for the panchvishays are not
initially generated in the antahkaran; rather, the indriyas first come
into contact with the vishays externally, and then those vishays
enter the antahkaran. To give another example, when a boil develops
externally on the skin, it can be soothed only by applying medication
externally, not by merely hearing talks. Also, one’s hunger and
thirst can only be relieved by eating and drinking, but not by merely
talking about food and water. Similarly, the disease in the form of
the panchvishays can only be cured when medication is applied
externally.

4

“The method of applying that medication is as follows: When
one’s skin touches a vishay like, for example, women and other
The Vachanãmrut

347

objects, that object ‘enters’ the antahkaran via the skin. Then, via
the antahkaran, it ‘enters’ the jiva. The vishay was not initially
generated from within the jiva or from the antahkaran. In fact, all
vishays which currently spring forth from the antahkaran have
definitely ‘entered’ from outside through the indriyas, albeit in a
previous life. Thus, the medicine for eradicating attachment to the
vishays is as follows: One should abstain from touching objects like
women and other alluring objects via the skin. Also, one should not
look at their beauty via the eyes, nor talk about them using the
tongue. One should not listen to them or about them via the ears.
Nor should one smell their fragrance through the nose. If, through
the five indriyas, one firmly abstains from the vishays in this
manner, then the ‘flow’ of the vishays cannot enter within from
outside. For example, a well can be cleaned only when the small
streamlets of water that flow into the well are clogged from their
entrance with cloth rags. In the same way, by keeping control over
the external indriyas, the external vishays cannot enter the
antahkaran.
5

“Again, a stomach illness can only be cured when medicine
enters the stomach. In the same manner, the vishays that have
already accumulated in the antahkaran by way of the indriyas
should be eradicated by thinking of oneself as the ãtmã. One should
think, ‘I am the ãtmã, and the indriyas and the antahkaran have
absolutely no relation with me.’ With such resolute thinking, by
beholding God’s form in that chaitanya and through the bliss of one’s
ãtmã, one should remain fulfilled. Take, for example, a well that is
completely full of water. The water in the well will prevent the flow
of new water from entering the well. However, if the well is emptied
by drawing water from it, then new water from outside will enter it.
Similarly, through the bliss of one’s ãtmã, one should remain fulfilled
within. Externally, one should obstruct the ‘inflow’ of the vishays
through the indriyas.
This is the only definite method for
overcoming lust, anger, etc. Except for this, though, they cannot be
overcome by fasting alone. So please imbibe this thought firmly in
your lives.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-2 || 135 ||

The Vachanãmrut

348

Gadhadã II-3
The Path of Amorousness and
the Knowledge of the Ãtmã
1

On Shrãvan sudi 4, Samvat 1878 [2 August 1821], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a small, silken, embroidered
cloth in front of the mandir of Shri Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã
Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white
clothes. At that time, some paramhansas were singing devotional
songs to the accompaniment of a jhãnjh and mrudang, while other
paramhansas as well as devotees from various places had gathered
before Him in an assembly.

2

Then, with a gesture of His eyes, Shriji Mahãrãj silenced the
audience and said, “Those of you who are senior paramhansas, please
come to the front as I wish to speak to you.”

3

So saying, Shriji Mahãrãj continued, “For those who worship
God, there are two paths that lead to eminence, and there are also
two paths that lead to downfall, all of which I shall now explain. One
path is to offer bhakti to God via the path of amorousness, and the
other path is knowledge of the ãtmã. Both can lead to eminence, but
both can also lead to downfall. Of these, thousands have fallen from
the amorous path, with only a few attaining God. Although even the
great ãchãryas have encouraged the offering of bhakti via the
amorous path, many have been ruined by it, and only a few have
benefited.

4

“The reason for this is that when God is described in an amorous
manner, Rãdhikãji and Lakshmiji, along with their companions, are
also described together with God. When women are described,
obviously their physical features are also described. How, then, can
the mind of the person who is describing them possibly remain
undisturbed? In fact, the nature of the indriyas is such that they
only develop affection for those vishays that are seductive. No
woman in all of the realms possesses beauty that can match the
beauty of Rãdhikãji or Lakshmiji, nor is there anyone who has such
a sweet voice as theirs; even the fragrance emanating from their
bodies is unrivalled. Thus, upon seeing or hearing about such
beauty, how can a person possibly not become infatuated? It is
inevitable. Even if a person’s mind is only slightly disturbed, he still
The Vachanãmrut

349

falls from the path of liberation. Therefore, all of this proves to be a
great obstacle for those who worship God via the amorous path.
5

“Now, ‘brahma-gnãn’i can also give rise to the following incorrect
understanding: Brahma itself assumes the form of Prakruti-Purush.
Then that Brahma itself assumes the forms of Brahmã, Vishnu and
Shiv. Thereafter, Brahma assumes the mobile and immobile forms
of creation. Subsequently, Brahma also becomes the jivas residing in
those mobile and immobile forms of creation. By misunderstanding
‘brahma-gnãn’ in such a manner, that individual then believes his
own jiva to be God, thus causing a breach in upãsanã. As a result,
he also falls from the path of God. So, in the path of ‘brahma-gnãn’,
such a breach in upãsanã is a major obstacle. Why? Because the
very God who is to be understood as the cause and master of
everything has been insulted.
Therefore, one with such
understanding should also be known to have fallen from the path of
liberation.

6

“Now, while these two paths do lead to liberation, the obstacles
along the way are also extremely grave. So, what should one who
desires liberation do? Please answer this question.”

7

All of the paramhansas then began to think, but no one was able
to supply a suitable answer.

8

Shriji Mahãrãj then said, “The answer to the question is as
follows: One’s mind does not become infatuated on seeing one’s own
mother, sister or daughter, even if they are very beautiful. Moreover,
even though one may talk with them, or even touch them, the mind
is not even slightly infatuated. In the same manner, if one were to
consider all female devotees of God as one’s own mother, sister or
daughter, then infatuation would not arise in any way at all. Then,
by worshipping God via the amorous path, one would attain
liberation.

9

“However, when a person does not have such understanding, and
harbours lustful thoughts on seeing some great female devotee of
God, the person’s character becomes gravely blemished.
Furthermore, whereas the blemish arising from lustfully looking at
other women is eradicated by having the darshan of a devotee of God,

i Here ‘brahma-gnãn’ should be interpreted to mean ‘knowledge of the ãtmã’.

The Vachanãmrut

350

no means of eradicating the blemish arising from lustfully looking at
a devotee of God is mentioned anywhere in the scriptures. The same
applies for females who look at a male devotee of God and harbour
lustful thoughts; they too can never be redeemed of that sin. Thus
the verse:

•ãÿˇÊòÊ ∑Î§Ã¢ ¬Ê¬¢ ÃËÕ¸ˇÊòÊ ÁflŸ‡ÿÁÃ–
ÃËÕ¸ˇÊòÊ ∑Î§Ã¢ ¬Ê¬¢ flÖÊ˝‹¬Ù ÷ÁflcÿÁÃH i
The verse means: ‘Sins committed elsewhere can be removed by
going to God or a devotee of God. If, however, one commits a sin
before God or His devotee, then it is like committing a sin at a place
of pilgrimage; it becomes irredeemable, as if etched in iron.’ Thus,
whosoever wishes to worship God via the path of amorousness should,
as I have explained, keep his mind pure.
10

“Now, on the path of ‘brahma-gnãn’, one should understand in
the following manner: Brahma is not subject to change and is
indivisible. Thus, it does not undergo change, nor can it be divided.
When that Brahma is equated with all forms, it is because that
Brahma is the cause of all – Prakruti-Purush, etc. It is their
supporter and pervades all through its antaryãmi powers.
Furthermore, that which is the cause, the supporter and the
pervader cannot be distinct from its effect. It is in reference to this
context that the scriptures equate that Brahma with all forms.
However, one should not believe that that Brahma itself undergoes
change and assumes the forms of all mobile and immobile beings.
Transcending that Brahma is Parabrahma, Purushottam Nãrãyan,
who is distinct from Brahma, and is the cause, the supporter and the
inspirer of Brahma. With such understanding, one should develop
oneness with one’s jivãtmã and with that Brahma, and worship
Parabrahma while maintaining a master-servant relationship with
Him. With such understanding, ‘brahma-gnãn’ also becomes an
unobstructed path to attaining the highest state of enlightenment.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-3 || 136 ||

i Anya-kshetre krutam pãpam teertha-kshetre vinashyati|

Teertha-kshetre krutam pãpam vajra-lepo bhavishyati||

The Vachanãmrut

351

Gadhadã II-4
Constant Contemplation Is Achieved through
Realising the Greatness of God and Shraddhã;
A Torn Waistcloth and a Gourd
1

On Shrãvan sudi 5, Samvat 1878 [3 August 1821], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on the veranda outside the westfacing medi in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed
entirely in white clothes. At that time, some paramhansas were
singing devotional songs in the Malãr raga to the accompaniment of a
dukad, sarodã, and satãr, while other paramhansas as well as
devotees from various places had gathered before Him in an
assembly.

2

Then Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Please stop the singing and let us
now talk about God.”

3

The paramhansas responded, “Very well, Mahãrãj.”

4

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj asked, “Suppose a person who
observes dharma as prescribed in the scriptures and also offers
bhakti to God is faced with such adverse circumstances that if he
tries to maintain bhakti, he is forced to lapse in his observance of
dharma, and if he tries to maintain his observance of dharma, then
he is forced to forsake bhakti. In such a case, which should he
maintain, and which should he forsake?”

5

Brahmãnand Swãmi replied, “If God is pleased by upholding
bhakti, then bhakti should be upheld; and if He is pleased by
upholding dharma, then dharma should be upheld.”

6

Hearing this, Shriji Mahãrãj countered, “For those who have
found the incarnate form of God, it is of course appropriate for them
to do only that which pleases God. But what should one do when God
is not incarnate?”

7

Muktãnand Swãmi attempted to answer, but he was unable to
do so satisfactorily.

8

Shriji Mahãrãj then said, “If one faces adverse circumstances
when God is not incarnate and there is no one else left to turn to,
then if one constantly contemplates only upon God, one will not fall
from the path of God.”

The Vachanãmrut

352

9

Thereafter, Shriji Mahãrãj asked another question, “One who
thoroughly realises the greatness of God feels, ‘No matter how many
sins one may have committed, if one merely utters the name of God
even once, all of one’s sins will be burnt to ashes.’ However, what
understanding should one who realises God’s greatness in this
manner cultivate so that he never falters from the observance of
dharma?”

10

Again, Muktãnand Swãmi attempted to answer but was unable
to do so satisfactorily.

11

So, replying to His own question, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “A person
who thoroughly realises God’s greatness can still observe dharma if
he cultivates the following understanding: ‘I want to constantly
contemplate upon God and become an ekãntik bhakta. But if my
vrutti is drawn towards vicious natures such as lust, anger, avarice,
etc., then that will be a hindrance in my contemplation of God.’
Realising this, he remains extremely wary of treading the wrong
path. As a result, he would never do anything related to adharma.
If a person has such an understanding, then even though he
thoroughly realises the greatness of God, he would never falter in his
observance of dharma.

12

“Indeed, it is not a small feat to be able to contemplate upon God
constantly.
Because if one were to leave this body while
contemplating upon God, one would attain an extremely elevated
state.”

13

Thereafter, Brahmãnand Swãmi asked, “We do realise this, yet
we still cannot constantly contemplate upon God. What is the reason
for this?”

14

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “First of all, to be able to constantly
contemplate upon God, one needs such shraddhã. If one does not
have such shraddhã, it implies that there is a corresponding
deficiency in realising God’s greatness. When there is a deficiency in
realising God’s greatness, it suggests that there is also a
corresponding deficiency in one’s conviction of God. So, if one realises
the greatness of God and has shraddhã as well, then one will be able
to constantly contemplate upon God.

15

“Furthermore, God’s greatness should be realised as follows:
God, who transcends Prakruti-Purush, is the very same when He
enters them; that is to say, He still retains His divine powers. Even
The Vachanãmrut

353

after He enters the entities evolved from Prakruti-Purush, i.e., the
brahmãnd, He retains the very same powers; but, in no way do
traces of mãyã affect God’s form.
For example, consider the
difference between gold and other metals. When they are buried
together in the ground, after a long period of time, the metals other
than the gold will decompose into the dirt surrounding them. In
comparison, the longer the gold stays in the ground, the more
valuable it becomes; i.e., it does not decompose in any way.
Similarly, God, deities such as Brahma and others, or other munis
are not all the same. This is because when they come into the
contact of dirt in the form of the vishays, then all except God become
engrossed in those vishays, regardless of how great they may be.
Moreover, although God seems to be like a human, there is no
worldly object capable of affecting Him. Regardless of how alluring a
vishay may be, He is never enticed by it. Such is the transcendental
greatness of God. If one realises such greatness, one would be able to
constantly contemplate upon God.
16

“However, as long as a devotee is attracted to vishays, he has not
realised God’s transcendental greatness at all. For example, Shri
Krishna Bhagwãn said to Uddhavji, ‘O Uddhav! You are not even
slightly lesser than me.’ Why was this so? Because Uddhavji had
realised God’s transcendental greatness and thus was not allured by
the panchvishays.

17

“For one who realises the greatness of God, to rule a kingdom or
to have to beg for food are both equivalent. He also feels the same
towards a young girl, a 16-year-old girl, and an 80-year-old woman.
In fact, he views all of the attractive and repulsive objects in this
world as being equal; he does not get enticed by an alluring object as
a moth does by a lamp. In fact, he is not tempted by any object
whatsoever except for God; he is only attracted to the form of God. A
devotee who behaves in this manner never becomes bound by
vishays, regardless of how enticing they may be.

18

“However, if a person has not understood this key principle, then
it would be very difficult for him to detach his mind from even a torn
waistcloth or a gourd. Thus, without realising God’s greatness in
this way, even if a person endeavours in a million other ways, he will
still not be able to constantly contemplate upon the form of God.
Conversely, only one who realises the greatness of God is able to
constantly contemplate upon Him.”
The Vachanãmrut

354

|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-4 || 137 ||

Gadhadã II-5
Fidelity and Courage
1

On Shrãvan sudi 7, Samvat 1878 [5 August 1821], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a small, silken, embroidered
cloth which had been placed on the platform in front of the mandir of
Shri Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He
was dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, some munis
were singing devotional songs to the accompaniment of a tãl and
mrudang, while other munis as well as devotees from various places
had gathered before Him in an assembly.

2

Then with a gesture of His eyes, Shriji Mahãrãj stopped the
devotional songs and said, “Everyone please listen; I wish to speak. A
devotee of God should firstly maintain fidelity, and secondly, courage.
For example, consider a woman who observes the vow of fidelity.
Even if her husband is old, sick, poor or ugly, the mind of that
faithful wife would never sway upon seeing the virtues of another
man. Even if a beggar’s wife, who observes such a vow, were to see a
great king, her mind would not waver. In a similar manner, a
devotee of God should observe the vow of fidelity with God.

3

“Furthermore, if someone were to speak ill of one’s husband,
then one should not remain timid and become subdued. Rather, one
should reply very boldly. In this manner, a devotee of God should not
become suppressed by evil people; he should be courageous.

4

“However, it is generally said that a sãdhu should view everyone
equally. But this is not the principle of the scriptures. Because
Nãrad, the Sanakãdik, Dhruv, Prahlãd, etc., have taken the side of
only God and His devotees; they have never taken the side of nonbelievers. One who does side with a non-believer will himself, either
in this life or in the next, definitely become a non-believer as well.
Therefore, a devotee of God should certainly side with God’s devotees
and forsake the side of non-believers. Please imbibe this discourse of
Mine extremely firmly.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-5 || 138 ||

The Vachanãmrut

355

Gadhadã II-6
A Draft; The Nature of the Chitt
1

On Shrãvan sudi 8, Samvat 1878 [6 August 1821], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a square platform in front of
the mandir of Shri Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in
Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time,
some of the paramhansas were singing devotional songs to the
accompaniment of a tãl and mrudang, while other paramhansas as
well as devotees from various places had gathered before Him in an
assembly.

2

Then Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Please stop the singing and let us
now talk about God.”

3

Thereupon, all of the munis sat with their hands folded. Shriji
Mahãrãj then continued, “In this world, there are many people who
are like infidels. They believe, ‘Water from the Gangã and other
water seems the same; shãligrãms and other stones seem the same;
tulsi and other trees seem the same; a Brãhmin and a Shudra seem
equal; food which is the prasãd of God and other food seems the same;
to fast on the day of Ekãdashi and to go hungry on any other day
seems the same; and a sãdhu and a non-sãdhu also seem the same.
Despite this being so, why have those so-called great men made
distinctions in the form of moral do’s and don’ts in the scriptures?’
This is what people with evil minds profess. That is why I put this
question to all of you sãdhus: Are those distinctions in the form of
moral do’s and don’ts prescribed in the scriptures by great men valid,
or are they concocted? May the junior paramhansas answer this
question.”

4

The junior paramhansas replied, “The distinctions in the form of
moral do’s and don’ts are indeed valid. If this were not so, how could
there be a distinction as to who deserves to attain swarg and who
deserves to attain narak?”

5

Hearing this, Shriji Mahãrãj commented, “They are young, but
they understand well.” Shriji Mahãrãj then elaborated upon the
answer Himself. He said, “Whatever the great men of the past have
prescribed in the scriptures is valid. Take the example of a wealthy
businessman. If he writes a draft to pay some other merchant, then
although it seems that the piece of paper is not worth even a single
rupee, it is indeed money. Only when one cashes the draft the
The Vachanãmrut

356

businessman had signed does one subsequently receive a large sum of
money from that very same draft. Similarly, although at the time
there may not seem to be any benefit in observing the moral do’s and
don’ts, one who does observe dharma by the command of a great
Purush ultimately attains liberation – just as one receives cash from
drafts.
6

“Moreover, a person who does not trust a draft signed by a
wealthy businessman should be known to be a fool – because he does
not realise the wealth of that businessman. Similarly, one who does
not trust the words of greats such as Nãrad, the Sanakãdik, Vyãs,
Vãlmiki, etc., should be known as a nãstik and a grave sinner.

7

“Furthermore, one who has such a nãstik attitude believes,
‘What is the difference between God’s murti and other stones? All
stones are one and the same. What is the difference between a
married woman and an unmarried woman? All women are equal.
What is the difference between one’s wife, mother or sister? After all,
they all look alike. In fact, even all of the avatãrs of God such as
Rãm, Krishna, etc., look like humans. Surely, then, the concept of
them being greater or lesser has been concocted by man’s
imagination. But what can we do? Because we have to live with
such people, we have to agree with whatever they say. Nevertheless,
the moral do’s and don’ts prescribed by the scriptures are definitely
nonsense.’ This is the understanding that sinners such as the
nãstiks have in their minds. If one hears such words from someone,
then the listener should be known as a sinner and a nãstik; and
realising him to be an outcast, one should by no means keep his
company.”

8

Shriji Mahãrãj then began another topic. He said, “The chitt of
all people is like honey, or like water saturated with gor, sugar or
sãkar. If, for example, a fly or an ant were to fall into that honey or
water saturated with gor, sugar or sãkar, it would become stuck in
it. Even if a person were to touch the honey or saturated water, it
would stick to the person’s finger as well. The nature of the chitt is
similar to this; it sticks to whatever object it recalls. In fact, the
chitt even attaches itself to things that are utterly insignificant, such
as stones, or rubbish, or dog excrement – things in which there is not
even the slightest pleasure. If it recalls such useless things, it will
then also contemplate upon them. Such is its sticky nature.

The Vachanãmrut

357

9

“Furthermore, just as the reflection of a great sãdhu will be seen
in a large, glass mirror if he stands before it, the reflection of a dog, a
donkey or a vile person will also be seen if they stand before it.
Similarly, the chitt is extremely pure; it can visualise whichever
object it recalls, regardless of whether it is appealing or not.
Therefore, a spiritual aspirant should not think, ‘Objects such as
women and other alluring vishays sprout in my chitt because I do not
possess vairãgya.’ In actual fact, objects sprout naturally even in the
chitt of one who does possess vairãgya. Thus, vairãgya or the lack of
it is not the reason behind this. Instead, the nature of the chitt is
such that whatever it recalls, be it good or bad, it contemplates upon.
When it contemplates upon an object, it appears just as it would
appear in a mirror. That is why one should realise, ‘I am distinct
from the chitt. I am the ãtmã, the observer of the chitt.’ Realising
this, one should not become frustrated by the pure or impure
thoughts arising in the chitt. Instead, one should realise oneself to be
distinct from one’s chitt, engage in the worship of God and always
remain joyful.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-6 || 139 ||

Gadhadã II-7
A Poor Man
1

On the night of Shrãvan sudi 11, Samvat 1878 [9 August 1821],
Swãmi Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting in front of the mandir
of Shri Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He
was dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, an assembly of
paramhansas as well as devotees from various places had gathered
before Him.

2

Thereupon Muktãnand Swãmi asked Shriji Mahãrãj, “A devotee
of God resolves in his mind, ‘I do not want to retain a single swabhãv
which may hinder me in worshipping God,’ and yet, such
inappropriate swabhãvs do remain. What is the reason for this?”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “If a person has a deficiency of vairãgya,
then even if he has the shraddhã to eradicate his swabhãvs, still they
will not be eradicated. For example, a poor man may wish for lots of
sumptous food and lavish clothes, but how can he acquire them?
Similarly, one who lacks vairãgya may wish in his heart to acquire
the virtues of a sãdhu, but it is very difficult for him to do so.”
The Vachanãmrut

358

4

Muktãnand Swãmi then asked, “If a person does not possess
vairãgya, what means should he adopt to eradicate those vicious
natures?”

5

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “If a person lacks vairãgya, but intensely
serves a great Sant, and obediently perseveres in his observance of
the injunctions of God, then God will look upon him with an eye of
compassion, and feel, ‘This poor fellow lacks vairãgya, and lust,
anger, etc., are harassing him very much. So now, may all those
vicious natures be eradicated.’ As a result, they will be eradicated
immediately. In comparison, if he were to endeavour in other ways,
those swabhãvs may be eradicated, but after a great deal of time and
effort – either in this life or in later lives. If such vicious natures are
eradicated instantly, then it should be known that they have been
eradicated by the grace of God.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-7 || 140 ||

Gadhadã II-8
Ekãdashi; ‘Gnãn-Yagna’; ‘Antardrashti’
1

In the early morning of Shrãvan sudi 12, Samvat 1878 [10
August 1821], Swãmi Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a
small, silken, embroidered cloth in front of the mandir of Shri
Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was
dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, some paramhansas
were singing devotional songs to the accompaniment of a tãl and
mrudang, while other paramhansas as well as devotees from various
places had gathered before Him in an assembly.

2

Then, addressing the sãdhus, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “One should
observe the Ekãdashi fast because of the following story: Once, God
was sleeping with his ten indriyas and mind – the eleventh indriya –
drawn inwards. At that time, Mur Dãnav, the son of Nãdijangh,
came to do battle with God. But then, a young woman was created
from the divine light of God’s eleven indriyas. Seeing her, Mur
Dãnav proposed to her, ‘Please marry me.’ The young woman
replied, ‘I have taken a vow that I will only marry the person who
defeats me in a duel.’ Thus, a duel between Mur Dãnav and the
young woman ensued, in which the young woman severed Mur
Dãnav’s head with a sword. God was pleased with her and said, ‘Ask
for a boon.’ The young woman requested, ‘On my day of observance,
The Vachanãmrut

359

no one should eat grains. Furthermore, since I was born from the
divine light of your eleven indriyas, my name is Ekãdashi. Since I
am an ascetic, on my day of observance, no one should indulge in any
of the vishays related to the eleven indriyas, which includes the
mind.’ Hearing Ekãdashi’s wish, God granted her that boon. This is
the story as it is narrated in the Purãns.
3

“The Dharma-shãstras also state: ‘The Ekãdashi fast should be
observed. On that day, one should not allow impure thoughts of lust,
anger, avarice, etc., to arise in the mind. Nor should one physically
engage in any immoral activities.’ This is what the scriptures
prescribe. In accordance with those scriptures, I also say that on the
day of Ekãdashi, one should not merely fast, but one should also
forsake the ‘food’ of the eleven indriyas. Only then can the Ekãdashi
observance be considered true; without that, it should be known as
mere fasting.

4

“Just as the prãns have their diet in the form of food, similarly,
the ears have a diet of sounds, the eyes have a diet of sights, the
tongue has a diet of tastes, the nose has a diet of smells and the mind
has a diet comprising of thoughts and desires. In this way, the
eleven indriyas have their respective diets. To forego these is called
observing the fast of Ekãdashi. However, to allow the eleven indriyas
to roam freely along the path of immorality and indulge in their
respective ‘foods’ is not truly Ekãdashi according to the scriptures.
Therefore, when observing the fast of Ekãdashi, the eleven indriyas
should not be allowed their respective diets.
Since such an
observance arrives once every fifteen days, one should definitely make
a point of observing it. In return, God will become pleased upon one.
Without this, however, merely fasting does not please Him.

5

“The residents of Shwetdwip, who are called niranna-muktas,
are continuously observing this fast, and never do they allow it to be
broken. That is precisely why they are called ‘niranna’ – food-less –
muktas. We too should have such aspirations as, ‘I want to become
like those niranna-muktas in Shwetdwip’; one should not lose heart
in this respect. Only if one keeps courage and observes the fast of
Ekãdashi in the way I mentioned earlier, listens to and engages in
the discourses of God and devotional songs and also stays awake at
night, is the fast considered to have been observed properly. This is
the very definition of the Ekãdashi observance as mentioned in the
scriptures.”
The Vachanãmrut

360

6

Having said this, Shriji Mahãrãj became silent. The sãdhus
then began to sing devotional songs.

7

Thereafter, Shriji Mahãrãj again said, “When Brahmã carried
out the very first creation, he told all of the people, ‘You should all
perform sacrifices.
Through them you will attain all of the
purushãrths, and the process of creation will also flourish.
Therefore, be sure to perform these sacrifices.’
Brahmã then
demonstrated the many different types of sacrifices along with their
rituals as described in the Vedas. To those who had adopted the path
of pravrutti, Brahmã demonstrated the rãjasik and tãmasik sacrifices
of the pravrutti path. To those who had adopted the path of nivrutti,
he demonstrated sãttvik sacrifices. These sacrifices have also been
described by Shri Krishna Bhagwãn in the Bhagwad Gitã. Since we
have adopted the path of nivrutti, we should perform sãttvik
sacrifices, not rãjasik or tãmasik sacrifices in which animals are
slaughtered.

8

“One can perform a sãttvik sacrifice by withdrawing the ten
indriyas and the mind – the eleventh indriya – from whichever
vishays they have become attached to and then offering them into the
brahma-agni.
Such a sacrifice is called a ‘yoga-yagna’.
By
continuously making such offerings, Parabrahma Shri Purushottam
manifests Himself within the brahmaswarup self of the person who
performs such a ‘yoga-yagna’, just as God grants darshan to the
performer of a traditional sacrifice. In fact, this is the fruit of the
‘yoga-yagna’.

9

“Furthermore, when a devotee of God engages in ‘antardrashti’,
it is called a ‘gnãn-yagna’.
Someone may ask, ‘What is
antardrashti?’ The answer is: To direct one’s vrutti towards either
the internal or the external form of God is itself ‘antardrashti’i .
Without doing this, even if one is sitting and seemingly engaged in
‘antardrashti’, it is still ‘bãhyadrashti’ii . Therefore, physical Godrelated activities, such as having the darshan of God, performing His
puja or engaging in discourses, devotional songs, etc., of God, are all,
i Literally, ‘antardrashti’ means ‘to look within’ or ‘to introspect’.

But here, Shriji

Mahãrãj gives His own, unique definition.
ii

The term ‘bãhyadrashti’ means ‘to look outwards’ and is the antonym of
‘antardrashti’

The Vachanãmrut

361

in fact, forms of ‘antardrashti’. All of these are aspects of a ‘gnãnyagna’. In addition, to behold that form of God within one’s heart, to
perform its puja, to bow before it, etc., is also ‘antardrashti’, and they
are also aspects of a ‘gnãn-yagna’. For this reason, then, all
satsangis are continuously performing such a ‘gnãn-yagna’.
However, it is by the wish of God that some attain samãdhi and
others do not. Nevertheless, sometimes, it could also be that the
devotee himself has some sort of deficiency.
10

“Then there are those foolish people who say, ‘Do not sing
devotional songs which describe the gopis; sing only nirgun
devotional songs.’ Those same fools claim that one who roams
around naked is nirgun. But if one could become nirgun by merely
walking around naked then even dogs, donkeys and other animals
would be called nirgun. That is the understanding of fools.

11

“In comparison, a devotee possessing gnãn realises, ‘Only God is
nirgun, and all those who have some relation to God are followers of
the nirgun path. Furthermore, any spiritual discourse or devotional
song associated with God is also considered nirgun. Others, which
are not associated with God, possess mãyik gunas and should thus be
considered to be sagun. So, if a person has not been graced with the
attainment of God, then even if he walks around naked, he cannot be
called nirgun; whereas even if a householder has been graced with
the attainment of God, he can still be called nirgun – as can a
renunciant.’ Therefore, the path to attaining God is itself the nirgun
path, and all God-related activities are thus also nirgun.

12

“As for a person who has come into contact with God, there is no
limit to his good fortune. But such a relationship with God is not the
result of merits from one life alone. That is why Shri Krishna
Bhagwãn has stated in the Bhagwad Gitã:

•Ÿ∑§¡ã◊‚¢Á‚hSÃÃÙ ÿÊÁÃ ¬⁄UÊ¢ ªÁÃ◊˜H i
The meaning of this verse is: ‘One becomes realised and attains the
highest state of enlightenment after the pious deeds of many lives
have accumulated.’ What is this highest state of enlightenment?
Well, the attainment of the manifest form of God is itself the highest
state of enlightenment.
i Aneka-janma-sansiddhas-tatoh yãti parãm gatim||

Bhagwad Gitã: 6.45

The Vachanãmrut

362

“Again, Shri Krishna Bhagwãn has said:

13

◊◊ÒflÊ¢‡ÊÙ ¡Ëfl‹Ù∑§ ¡Ëfl÷ÍÃ— ‚ŸÊÃŸ—–
◊Ÿ—·DÔUÊŸËÁãº˝ÿÊÁáÊ ¬˝∑Î§ÁÃSÕÊÁŸ ∑§·¸ÁÃH i
This verse means: ‘In this world, those jivas who are ‘anshas’ii of God
withdraw their mind and five gnãn-indriyas away from the
panchvishays and keep them suppressed. On the other hand, those
who are not ‘anshas’ of God are drawn by their indriyas and are
taken where the indriyas wish to go.’ Because we are not led astray
by our indriyas, we should realise ourselves to be ‘anshas’ of God.
Realising this, we should remain elated, should engage in the
worship of God and should offer all of the vruttis of our indriyas to
God.
We should continuously perform a ‘gnãn-yagna’ in this
manner.
14

“Without performing such sacrifices, there is no way in which
liberation can be attained. The four Vedas, the Sãnkhya scriptures,
the Yoga scriptures, the Dharma-shãstras, the 18 Purãns, the
Mahãbhãrat, the Rãmãyan, the Nãrad Panchrãtra, in fact, all
scriptures share the principle that liberation cannot be attained
without performing sacrifices.

15

“It is also My command that all paramhansas and all satsangis
should continue performing a ‘gnãn-yagna’. While performing a
‘gnãn-yagna’ in this manner, one ultimately has a divine vision of
Parabrahma within one’s own self, which is Brahma. This is the
fruit of the ‘gnãn-yagna’. The climax of the ‘gnãn-yagna’ ritual is
when one becomes like a niranna-mukta of Shwetdwip. As long as
one has not attained that state, one should realise that much is left to
be accomplished. In fact, one should harbour a strong desire to
become like a niranna-mukta. In the process, one should not lose
faith, and one should not consider oneself to be unfulfilled. Since one
has been graced with the attainment of God, one should consider
i Mamaivãnsho jeevaloke jeeva-bhootaha sanãtanaha|

Manah-shashthãneendriyãni prakrutisthãni karshati||
Bhagwad Gitã: 15.7
ii

‘Ansh’ literally means ‘part, component’, but in this context it should be
interpreted as ‘devotee’.

The Vachanãmrut

363

oneself to be absolutely fulfilled, and one should diligently continue
performing the ‘gnãn-yagna’.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-8 || 141 ||

Gadhadã II-9
Conviction of God; Realising God to be like
Other Avatãrs Is Blasphemy
1

On Shrãvan sudi 14, Samvat 1878 [12 August 1821], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a small, silken,
embroidered cloth in front of the mandir of Shri Vãsudevnãrãyan in
Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. Ãnandãnand Swãmi had just
performed His puja. Shriji Mahãrãj was wearing a red survãl and
dagli made from kinkhãb. He had tied a golden-bordered, orange reto
around His head and had also tied a brocaded shelu around His
waist. On His shoulder was a sky-blue coloured reto, and tied
around His wrist were several rãkhdis. At that time, an assembly of
munis as well as devotees from various places had gathered before
Him.

2

Thereupon Muktãnand
devotional songs.”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Let us talk about God.”
He then
continued, “The path of gnãn should be understood in such a way
that one does not malign the form of God in any way. In fact, one
should not worry if at sometime or other one has transgressed God’s
commands; but one should never malign the form of God. If one does
disobey God’s commands, then one can still be freed from that sin by
praying to God; however, there are no means of release for one who
has maligned the form of God. Therefore, one who is wise should
certainly abide by God’s commands to the best of one’s ability.
However, one should also intensely maintain the strength of
conviction in God’s form; i.e., ‘I have attained the very form of God
who reigns supreme, who forever possesses a divine form, and who is
the ‘avatãri’ – the cause of all of the avatãrs.’ If a person realises
this, then even if he may have left the Satsang fellowship, his love for
God’s form will not diminish. In fact, even though he is out of
Satsang at present, ultimately, when he leaves his body, he will go to
God’s Akshardhãm and stay near God.
The Vachanãmrut

Swãmi

suggested,

“Let

us

sing

364

4

“On the other hand, a person may be in the Satsang fellowship
at present, and he may even be abiding by the commands prescribed
in the scriptures, but if his conviction of God is not firm, then when
he leaves his body, he will either go to the realm of Brahmã or to the
realm of some other deity; but he will not go to the abode of
Purushottam Bhagwãn. Therefore, one should realise the manifest
God that one has attained to forever possess a divine form and to be
the ‘avatãri’, the cause of all of the avatãrs. If, however, one does not
realise this, and instead realises God to be formless or like the other
avatãrs, then that is regarded as committing blasphemy against God.

5

“Now consider the following: Arjun’s spiritual strength was
based on his conviction of God, whereas Yudhishthir’s source of
strength was his faith in the words of the scriptures. Then, when
the Mahãbhãrat war was fought, Shri Krishna Bhagwãn said to
Arjun,

‚fl¸œ◊Ê¸ã¬Á⁄UàÿÖÿ ◊Ê◊∑¢§ ‡Ê⁄UáÊ¢ fl˝¡–
•„¢ àflÊ ‚fl¸¬Ê¬èÿÙ ◊ÙˇÊÁÿcÿÊÁ◊ ◊Ê ‡ÊÈø—H i
The meaning of this verse is, ‘O Arjun! Abandon all of the various
types of dharma and surrender only unto me. I shall deliver you
from all sins, so do not lament.’ By keeping faith in these words,
Arjun never became disheartened, despite committing countless
misdeeds during the war.
He maintained firm faith in God.
Conversely, Yudhishthir had not committed any sins whatsoever,
and yet, because he had faith in the words of the scriptures, he felt, ‘I
shall never attain liberation.’ Even when all of the rishis, Vyãsji and
even Shri Krishna Bhagwãn himself attempted to explain to him,
still he did not forsake his remorse. Only when Shri Krishna
Bhagwãn took him to Bhishma and had him listen to Bhishma’s
discourse on the true meaning of the words of the scriptures did he
develop some faith. Nevertheless, he did not become totally free of
doubt like Arjun. Thus, one who is intelligent should intensely
maintain spiritual strength based on the conviction of God.
6

“Even the slightest strength based on this conviction will protect
one from great dangers. Shri Krishna Bhagwãn has also said,
i Sarva-dharmãn-parityajya mãm-ekam sharanam vraja|

Aham tvã sarva-pãpebhyo mokshayishyãmi mã shuchaha||
Bhagwad Gitã: 18.66

The Vachanãmrut

365

SflÀ¬◊åÿSÿ œ◊¸Sÿ òÊÊÿÃ ◊„UÃÙ ÷ÿÊÃ˜H i
This verse means, ‘If one has the slightest strength based on the
conviction of God, it will protect one from great calamities.’ For
example, when Arjun fought in the Mahãbhãrat war, he encountered
many, many types of grave dangers in the form of adharma. Yet, he
was spared from those dangers because of his conviction of God.
Therefore, only he can be called an ekãntik bhakta whose strength
is based on the conviction of God more than anything else; and only
he can be called a staunch satsangi. The Shrimad Bhãgwat also
mentions this predominantly; i.e., ‘If one strays from the dharma
proclaimed in the Shrutis and Smrutis, one should not worry.
However, one should never abandon the refuge of God.’
7

“Then some may feel, ‘If we propound such talks, dharma will
become irrelevant.’ But this principle is not intended to make
dharma irrelevant. Rather its purpose is as follows: Places, times,
actions, company, mantras, scriptures, preachings and deities can be
of two types – pure and impure. Of these, if one were to encounter
the impure, and if as a result some difficulties were to arise, then if
one has the firm conviction of God, one would never fall from the path
of liberation. Conversely, if there is a deficiency in one’s conviction of
God, then whenever one falters from dharma, one would feel, ‘I am
destined to fall into narak.’ Therefore, only one whose strength is
based on the conviction of God is a staunch satsangi. Without this,
one is merely appreciative of Satsang. Even the scriptures mention
that only one who firmly maintains the conviction of God is called an
ekãntik bhakta.”

8

Then Shriji Mahãrãj said, “If Nãrad, the Sanakãdik, and deities
such as Brahmã and others were to hear the discourses being
presently delivered in Satsang, they would say, ‘We have never heard
such talks before, and we shall never hear them again.’ These
discourses can be described as ‘Ÿ ÷ÍÃÙ Ÿ ÷ÁflcÿÁÃ’ii . Although these
talks are extremely subtle, even a person of average intelligence can
i Svalpam-apyasya dharmasya trãyate mahato bhayãt||

Bhagwad Gitã: 2.40
ii Na bhooto na bhavishyati

Never before have there been [such talks], and never again will there be [such
talks].

The Vachanãmrut

366

understand them. It is as if these talks are personified. Therefore,
there is no limit to the merits of one who, at this present time, has a
conviction of Satsang. Realising this, those who are satsangis should
consider themselves to be totally fulfilled. Moreover, a person who
has profound love for God, regardless of whether he understands this
discourse, has nothing left to do. If, on the other hand, one does not
have such profound love for God, then one should definitely realise
the greatness of God. Thus, one who is wise should contemplate upon
this discourse, understand it, and then take extremely firm refuge in
God. This principle alone is the very essence of all essences.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-9 || 142 ||

Gadhadã II-10
Safeguarding the Foetus in the Form of Faith in God
1

On Shrãvan vadi 3, Samvat 1878 [16 August 1821], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj arrived at Lakshmivãdi on horsebacki from
Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. There, He sat facing north on
the square platform under the mango tree. He was dressed entirely
in white clothes. At that time, an assembly of paramhansas as well
as devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “The Shrimad Bhãgwat
proclaims that Brahma possesses a form. However, if those who read
it do not have bhakti for God, they will understand God to be
formless, even from reading the Shrimad Bhãgwat. Also, from the
second canto, which describes the characteristics of the refuge of
God, those who are lacking in bhakti will again understand God to be
formless. In reality, though, God is not formless. Why? Because it
is through God that everything mobile and immobile is created.
Now, if God were formless, then how could He create something that
possesses a form? For example, ãkãsh is formless. Therefore, pots
and other forms that can be created from pruthvi cannot be created
from that ãkãsh. In the same manner, since Brahmã and the rest of
creation possess a form, God, their creator, also definitely possesses a
form.

i On His mare Mãnki.

The Vachanãmrut

367

3

“Moreover, the Shrimad Bhãgwat states: ‘The supporter of
adhyãtma, adhibhut and adhidev is God.’ Now I shall explain how,
so please listen carefully. Adhyãtma, the indriyas of Virãt-Purush;
adhibhut, his five mahãbhuts; and adhidev, the presiding deities of
the indriyas of Virãt-Purush, all entered Virãt. Despite this, Virãt
was unable to rise. Only when Vãsudev Bhagwãn assumed the form
of Purush and entered Virãt-Purush, did Virãt-Purush rise. That
God thus acts with onenessi with the adhyãtma, adhibhut and
adhidev of Virãt-Purush. In reality, however, He is distinct from
Virãt, and only this form of God is said to be worthy of seeking
refuge.

4

“For example, fire in the form of light is formless, while Agni
himself possesses a definite form. Moreover, when Agni suffered from
indigestion ii , he came to Krishna and Arjun in his personified form.
Then, when he went to burn the Khãndav forest of Indra, that same
Agni assumed the form of flames and spread throughout the whole
forest. In the same way, Purushottam Bhagwãn pervades all
through His antaryãmi powers, which are brahmarup.
Yet,
possessing a definite form, He is also distinct from all. Brahmaiii
itself is a ray of the light of Purushottam Bhagwãn, while God
Himself always possesses a form. Therefore, a person who aspires to
attain liberation should realise God to possess a definite form and
should maintain His firm refuge.

5

“Moreover, he should speak in such a manner so as not to break
someone’s refuge of God. For example, just as a woman who carries
a foetus in her womb attains a child, one who carries a foetus in the
form of faith in God, attains God’s Akshardhãm. Therefore, one
should practise such methods whereby that foetus is never
endangered. One should also talk to others in such a way that that
foetus in the form of faith in God does not miscarry.”

i Unlike total unity, this ‘oneness’ should be understood to be unity through the

antaryãmi power of God.
ii Here ‘indigestion’ refers to Agni not being able to bear his own extraordinary

heat.
iii ‘Brahma’ in this context refers to the divine light of Purushottam Bhagwãn,

and should not be understood to mean ‘Aksharbrahma’.

The Vachanãmrut

368

6

Thereafter, Shriji Mahãrãj returned to Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr
from Lakshmivãdi. There, He sat on a large, decorated cot on the
veranda outside the east-facing rooms. At that time, an assembly of
paramhansas as well as devotees from various places had gathered
before Him.

7

Then Shriji Mahãrãj summoned the junior paramhansas and
initiated a discussion amongst them. Achintyãnand Swãmi then
asked a question: “Of the three – gnãn, vairãgya and bhakti – which
one plays a more significant role in fostering affection for God?”

8

No one was able to answer that question. So Shriji Mahãrãj
said, “Here, I shall answer that question, and I shall also describe the
characteristics of gnãn, vairãgya and bhakti in turn.

9

“All people have a tendency such that on seeing an enticing
object, their affection for any object that is not as enticing will
naturally diminish. Thus, before the bliss of God’s Akshardhãm,
these worldly pleasures seem artificial; permanent bliss can only be
found in the abode of God. Therefore, if while listening to talks about
God, the bliss related to God is realised, then everything that has
evolved from mãyã will appear worthless. For example, a man with
a copper coin in his hand will lose affection for it when someone offers
him a gold coin in exchange. In the same way, when one realises the
bliss related to God, one develops vairãgya towards all worldly
pleasures, and one develops love only for the form of God. That is the
form of vairãgya.

10

“Now I shall describe the form of gnãn. There are two sets of
scriptures that explain gnãn: One set is the Sãnkhya scriptures, and
the other set is the Yoga scriptures.

11

“Of these, the doctrine of the Sãnkhya scriptures is as follows:
Ãkãsh pervades pruthvi, jal, tej and vãyu, and there is not even a
single anu that is devoid of ãkãsh; still the shortcomings of pruthvi,
jal, etc., do not affect ãkãsh at all. In the same manner as ãkãsh, no
mãyik flaw can affect Purushottam Bhagwãn. This fact is mentioned
in the Krishnatãpni Upanishad as follows: When Durvãsã Rishi
came to Vrundãvan, Shri Krishna Bhagwãn told the gopis, ‘Durvãsã
Rishi is hungry; so all of you take dishes of food and go to him.’

12

“Then the gopis asked, ‘But the Yamunã flows along the way.
How shall we be able to cross it?’

The Vachanãmrut

369

13

“Shri Krishna Bhagwãn replied, ‘Tell Yamunãji that if Shri
Krishna is forever a brahmachãri, then please make way for us.’

14

“Laughing, the gopis went to the banks of the Yamunã and said
this. Immediately, Yamunãji gave way. The gopis fed the rishi, and
he in turn ate all of the food. Then the gopis asked him, ‘How shall
we return home, as the Yamunã flows along the way?’

15

“The rishi then asked them, ‘How did you get here?’

16

“The gopis then explained, ‘Shri Krishna had told us that if he
has been a brahmachãri since childhood, then ask Yamunãji to give
way. Thus, Yamunãji gave way, and we have come to you.’

17

“Hearing this, the rishi said, ‘Now tell Yamunãji that if Durvãsã
is continuously fasting, then please give way to us.’

18

“Again, laughing, the gopis said this. Immediately, Yamunãji
gave way. On seeing these two incidents, the gopis were totally
dumbfounded.

19

“Therefore, God is unaffected in the same manner as ãkãsh, and
despite being the doer of all actions, God still remains a non-doer.
Although He is associated with all, He remains absolutely aloof. In
this way, the Sãnkhya scriptures describe God as being unaffected.
To understand this is gnãn according to the Sãnkhya doctrine.

20

“Now I shall explain the doctrine of the Yoga scriptures, so
please listen. The doctrine of Yoga is that whoever wishes to
meditate on God should first stabilise his vision. To stabilise the
vision, it should first be fixed upon the form of God or some other
object. Then, while staring at the same object, the vision becomes
steady, and with it, the antahkaran also becomes steady. When the
antahkaran becomes steady, God’s form should be beheld in the
heart. This would not be strenuous for the yogi who attempts to
behold the form; in fact, he can behold it quite easily. However, if,
from the beginning, a person does not stabilise his antahkaran
through practice, then when he does meditate on God, many other
types of disturbing thoughts arise and obstruct his path.

21

“Thus the principle of the Yoga scriptures is as follows: ‘The
vrutti should first be stabilised through practice before it is attached
to God.’ Realising this is gnãn according to the Yoga scriptures.
Therefore, to consolidate one’s understanding through the doctrines of
those two scriptures is known as gnãn.
The Vachanãmrut

370

22

“Now the method of practising bhakti is as follows: When the
ocean was churned, Lakshmiji emerged from the ocean. After taking
a marriage garland in her hand, Lakshmiji thought, ‘Who is suitable
for marriage? I shall marry him.’ Then, wherever she looked and
examined, whoever was handsome lacked virtues, and whoever
possessed virtues lacked beauty. In this way, she noticed great
shortcomings in many. She then saw all of the deities and all of the
demons as possessing such shortcomings as well. Finally, seeing
that it was only God who was complete with all virtues, without any
faults at all and the source of all bliss, Lakshmiji developed profound
bhakti towards God. With intense love, she placed the marriage
garland around God’s neck and married God. Therefore, to realise
such redemptive virtues in God and to seek His firm refuge is known
as bhakti.”

23

Hearing this, Muktãnand Swãmi asked Shriji Mahãrãj,
“Mahãrãj, I have not yet quite understood which of the three of gnãn,
vairãgya or bhakti has the greater power in fostering affection for
God.”

24

Then Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “Bhakti has a lot of power; and
while gnãn and vairãgya also have such power, it is not as much as
that of bhakti. However, true bhakti is extremely rare. The
characteristics of those who possess bhakti are as follows: When God
assumes a form like a human for the sake of the liberation of the
jivas and travels on this earth, many of God’s actions are divine and
many appear to be mãyik. When God assumed the avatãr of
Krishna, He gave darshan to Devki and Vasudev in a four-armed
form. He also lifted Mount Govardhan. He cleansed the Yamunã’s
waters of poison by removing Kãliyãnãg. He subdued the infatuation
of Brahmã and gave darshan to Akrurji in the waters of the
Yamunã. He also dispelled the strife of all of the Yãdavs by killing
the wrestlers, an elephant, as well as wicked persons like Kansa.
Similarly, in the avatãr of Rãm, He broke the bow and also dispelled
the strife of the deities by killing wicked persons such as Rãvan.
These and other such exploits are known as the divine actions of God.

25

“However, when Sitã was abducted, Raghunãthji appeared to
have become insane due to constant crying. In the avatãr of
Krishna, he fled from Kãlyavan, was defeated by Jarãsandh, and also
had to relinquish his kingdom in Mathurã to go and settle on an
island in the sea. These and other such actions of God appear to be
The Vachanãmrut

371

human-like. Even a sinner would perceive divinity in the divine
actions of God; a true devotee of God, however, would perceive
divinity even when God performs human-like actions. In the Gitã,
God has said,

¡ã◊ ∑§◊¸ ø ÁŒ√ÿ◊fl¢ ÿÙ flÁ?Ê Ã?flÃ—–
àÿQ˜§flÊ Œ„¢ ¬ÈŸ¡¸ã◊ ŸÒÁÃ ◊Ê◊ÁÃ ‚Ù˘¡È¸ŸH i
This verse means: ‘O Arjun! My birth and my actions are divine.
He who realises them as divine will not take another birth when he
leaves his body; rather, he will attain me.’ So whenever God
performs divine actions, they appear divine to both a devotee and to
one who is not a devotee. However, when God performs human-like
actions, a true devotee still perceives divinity in them, but by no
means does he perceive flaws in such actions of God. Having such
understanding is known as having bhakti towards God. In fact, only
such devotees earn the fruits mentioned in the above verse.
26

“The gopis were devotees of God, and they never, in any way,
perceived flaws in God. On the other hand, merely on listening to the
talks about the gopis, King Parikshit perceived a flaw in God.
Shukji then explained those flaws to be false by illustrating the
powers of God. Therefore, bhakti in which one perceives all of the
actions and incidents of God as being divine, as the gopis did, and
never perceives a flaw by understanding them to be human-like, is
very rare. In fact, it is not achieved by merely doing good deeds for
one or two lives. Rather, only when the pure sanskãrs of many lives
accumulate, does bhakti like that of the gopis develop. In fact, such
bhakti is itself the highest state of enlightenment. It is this type of
bhakti that is greater than gnãn and vairãgya. If a person has such
bhakti in his heart, what would be lacking in his love for God?
Nothing would be lacking.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-10 || 143 ||

i Janma karma cha me divyam-evam yo vetti tattvataha|

Tyaktvã deham punar-janma naiti mãm-eti so’rjuna||
Bhagwad Gitã: 4.9

The Vachanãmrut

372

Gadhadã II-11
All Karmas Becoming a Form of Bhakti
1

On Shrãvan vadi 5, Samvat 1878 [18 August 1821], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot under the
neem tree in front of the mandir of Shri Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã
Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white
clothes. At that time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees from
various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “After listening to all of the
scriptures, some people believe that they only deal with dharma, arth
and kãm. Thinking thus, they themselves also perform pious
karmas such as sacrifices, observances, etc., only for the attainment
dharma, arth and kãm. As a result, they enjoy the fruits of such
karmas in Devlok, Brahmalok or Mrutyulok. Then, they return to
the cycle of births and deaths. Therefore, the pious karmas that a
person performs while harbouring a desire for dharma, arth and
kãm, all become sãttvik, rãjasik and tãmasik; and the fruits of those
karmas are enjoyed while staying in the realms of swarg, Mrutyulok
and pãtãl. However, they do not attain the gunãtit abode of God. As
long as one does not attain liberation, the miseries of births, deaths
and narak do not subside.

3

“So, if one abandons the desire for the fruits related to dharma,
arth and kãm, and if one performs pious karmas only to please God,
then those pious karmas become a form of bhakti and aid in the
attainment of liberation. Thus the verses:

•Ê◊ÿÙ ÿŸ ÷ÍÃÊŸÊ¢ ¡ÊÿÃ ÿp ‚Èfl˝Ã–
ÃŒfl sÔÊ◊ÿ¢ º˝√ÿ¢ Ÿ ¬ÈŸÊÁÃ ÁøÁ∑§Áà‚Ã◊˜H
∞fl¢ ŸÎáÊÊ¢ Á∑˝§ÿÊÿÙªÊ— ‚fl¸ ‚¢‚ÎÁÃ„UÃfl—–
Ã ∞flÊà◊ÁflŸÊ‡ÊÊÿ ∑§À¬ãÃ ∑§ÁÀ¬ÃÊ— ¬⁄UH i
i Ãmayo yena bhootãnãm jãyate yash-cha suvrat|

Tad-eva hyãmayam dravyam na punãti chikitsitam||
Evam nrunãm kriyã-yogãhã sarve sansruti-hetavaha|
Ta evãtma-vinãshãya kalpante kalpitãhã pare||
O Observer of Pious Vows [Vyãs]! Does not that same [food, e.g. ghee] which
causes illness in beings – if purified and prescribed by a qualified doctor – cure

The Vachanãmrut

373

The essence of this verse is as I have described earlier.
4

“However, this fact is actually very intricate, and if it is not fully
understood, then on seeing a devotee of God behaving in the same
way as all ignorant people do, one would perceive flaws in him. As a
result, the person who perceives the flaws would be consigned to
narak.

5

“But in fact, there is a vast difference between the activities of a
devotee of God and the activities of a non-believer. How? Well, all
activities of a non-believer are for pampering his indriyas, whereas
all activities of a devotee of God are solely for serving God and His
devotee. As a result, the devotee’s activities are a form of bhakti.

6

“Moreover, bhakti is like gnãn in the sense that both are a form
of non-karma. Hence, all of a devotee’s activities are in a form of
karmas that do not cause attachment. Thus the verse in the
Bhagwad Gitã:

∑§◊¸áÿ∑§◊¸ ÿ— ¬‡ÿŒ∑§◊¸ÁáÊ ø ∑§◊¸ ÿ—–
‚ ’ÈÁh◊Êã◊ŸÈcÿ·È ‚ ÿÈQ — ∑Î§àF∑§◊¸∑Î§Ã˜H i
The meaning of this verse is as follows: If a person sees non-karma,
i.e., gnãn, in the karmas performed by the devotees of God for the
purpose of pleasing God; and he sees a non-believer who has adopted
the path of nivrutti as drowned in karmas, then such a person is said
to possess gnãn and is the most intelligent amongst all people; he is a
yogi; he is worthy to attain liberation and is ‘∑Î§àF∑§◊¸∑Î§Ã˜’ – i.e., he has
performed all karmas.
7

“Therefore, if in any way a person perceives a flaw in a devotee of
God who, by God’s command, performs karmas for the purpose of
pleasing God, then adharma and its retinue will enter and reside in
the perceiver’s heart.”
that illness? Similarly, then, if all of one’s karmas – which [normally] cause one
to pass through births and deaths – are offered to God instead, those same
karmas are destroyed [i.e. are no longer capable of causing births and deaths, but
instead, lead to one’s liberation].
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 1.5.33 & 34
i Karmanyakarma yaha pashyed-akarmani cha karma yaha|
Sa buddhimãn-manushyeshu sa yuktaha krutsna-karma-krut||
Bhagwad Gitã: 4.18

The Vachanãmrut

374

|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-11 || 144 ||

Gadhadã II-12
The Art of Ruling
1

On Shrãvan vadi 6, Samvat 1878 [19 August 1821], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting in front of the mandir of Shri
Vãsudevnãrãyan on the veranda outside the west-facing rooms of
Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in
white clothes. At that time, an assembly of paramhansas as well as
devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “I wish to talk to you, so please
listen. In the discourse I am about to deliver, I shall describe only
one spiritual endeavour for attaining liberation, but it is so powerful
that all other spiritual endeavours are incorporated within it. It is as
follows:

3

“The jiva, which resides in the body, feels, ‘Lust, anger and
other vicious natures are attached to my jiva.’ In this manner,
depending on which of the vicious natures, i.e., lust, anger, avarice,
etc., is predominant in a person, he believes his jiva to be full of that
nature due to his association with it. But, in fact, not a single one of
these vicious natures lies within the jiva; the jiva has merely believed
itself to possess them out of its own foolishness.

4

“Hence, he who wishes to attain the highest state of
enlightenment should make an effort, but he should not relax or lose
courage. Also, he should think, ‘Just as the four antahkarans, the
ten indriyas, and the five prãns reside in this body, similarly, I am
the jivãtmã, and I also reside in this body. However, I am greater
than all of them, and I am their controller.’ But he should not think,
‘I am insignificant, whereas the antahkarans and indriyas are
strong.’
For example, if a king were to possess little or no
intelligence, then even the members of his own family would not obey
his orders. When the people in the village hear about this, no one in
the village would obey his orders.
Further, when the people
throughout the kingdom hear about this, no one in the kingdom
would obey his orders. As a result, the king would become depressed
and powerless. He would sit idly and would not attempt to enforce
his rule over anyone.
The Vachanãmrut

375

5

“In this analogy, the king symbolises the jiva, the members of
the household symbolise the antahkaran, and the people of the village
and kingdom symbolise the indriyas. So, if the jiva becomes
discouraged and relaxes its authority, then when it wishes to exercise
its sovereignty over the antahkaran and orient it towards God, the
antahkaran will not follow. Also, if it wishes to control the indriyas,
even the indriyas will not comply. Then, even though the jiva is the
king of the kingdom in the form of this body, it becomes helpless like
a beggar. When a king becomes discouraged, his subjects who live in
his kingdom assume power and do not allow him to exercise his
authority at all. Likewise, in the kingdom of the jiva, symbolised by
this body, lust, anger and other vicious natures – who are not the
king – assume the kingship. Then, they do not allow the jiva to
exercise control.

6

“Thus, he who aspires to attain liberation should never harbour
such timidity and should employ whatever measures are necessary to
force the indriyas and antahkaran to accept his authority – like a
king who studies books about the art of ruling and then exercises
authority over his kingdom, but is not subdued by his subjects.
However, if the king did not know the art of ruling, the people would
not obey his orders; rather, they would begin to beat him. Then, his
country would become desolate, or he himself would behave miserably
because no one would obey his rule. In this manner, not knowing the
art of ruling results in two unfortunate consequences. Similarly, if
the jiva were to attempt to rule the kingdom in the form of the body
without understanding the art of ruling, then it would never become
happy.”

7

Thereafter, Muktãnand Swãmi asked Shriji Mahãrãj, “How
should one who aspires to attain liberation learn the art of ruling?”

8

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “The art of ruling should be learnt in the
following way: First of all, one should thoroughly realise the
greatness of God.
Then, one should conquer one’s mind by
meditating on God’s form. One should conquer one’s ears by
listening to discourses related to God, but one should not allow
worldly talks to be heard by the ears. In the same manner, the skin
should only be allowed to touch God and the devotees of God. The
eyes should only be allowed to do darshan of God and His followers.
The tongue should forever sing the praises of God and taste only the
prasãd of God. The nose should only be allowed to smell the
The Vachanãmrut

376

fragrance of flowers and other objects that have been consecrated by
God.
None of the indriyas should be allowed to follow the
unrighteous path. When a person behaves in this manner, no one
can overthrow his authority in the kingdom in the form of his body.
9

“Only one who endeavours in this way and totally discards
timidity is said to be walking on the path of liberation. This is an
extremely great method for overcoming one’s swabhãvs. If this
method of personal endeavour is practised vigilantly, then all
spiritual endeavours for attaining liberation are incorporated within
this one endeavour. Hence, personal endeavour itself is the greatest
of all spiritual endeavours for attaining liberation.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-12 || 145 ||

Gadhadã II-13
Divine Light
1

On Shrãvan vadi Amãs, Samvat 1878 [27 August 1821], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a small, silken,
embroidered cloth on the veranda outside the mandir of Shri
Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was
wearing a white khes and had covered Himself with a white cotton
cloth. He had also tied a white pãgh around His head. At that time,
an assembly of munis as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him.

2

Raising both arms in the air, Shriji Mahãrãj signalled the
assembly to settle down and listen. Turning to the sãdhus who were
humbly praying before Him with folded hands, Shriji Mahãrãj said,
“O paramhansas! All of the seniors, along with those who are wise,
please come to the front. Please listen very attentively to what I am
about to say. What I am about to say to you, I say not out of any
pretence, or out of any self-conceit, or to spread My own greatness.
Rather, it is because I feel that amongst all of you sãdhus and
devotees, if someone can understand My message, it will
tremendously benefit that person; that is My purpose in narrating it.
Moreover, this discourse is based on what I have seen and realised
through My own experience. In fact, it is also in agreement with the
scriptures. Although I feel that it is not appropriate to discuss this in
public, I shall tell you nonetheless.
The Vachanãmrut

377

3

“I remain naturally in a state in which even if I wished to
engross my mind in the most charming sounds, the most charming
touch, the most charming smells, the most charming tastes and the
most charming sights of this world, I could not do so; I remain
absolutely dejected towards them. In fact, all of the attractive
vishays and the repulsive vishays are the same to Me. Also, a king
and a beggar are the same to Me. Further, to rule all the realms and
to beg for food carrying a broken begging bowl are the same to Me.
Even sitting with honour on an elephant and walking on foot are the
same to Me. Whether someone honours Me with sandalwood paste,
flowers, fine clothes and ornaments, or throws dirt on Me – all are
the same to Me. Whether someone praises Me or insults Me – both
are the same to Me. Gold, silver, diamonds and refuse are all the
same to Me. Moreover, I look upon all devotees of God as being equal;
i.e., I do not differentiate one as being superior and another as being
inferior.

4

“I have intense vairãgya in My antahkaran, yet I am not
burdened by it. I do not feel burdened like a person who carries a
heavy rock on his head or ties a purse full of money and gold coins
around his waist. My strict observance of swadharma does not
burden Me, nor does the realisation that I am Brahma burden Me.
When I superficially praise some object or criticise another, I do so
purposefully. Whenever I forcefully engage My indriyas’ vruttis
towards objects, they remain there very reluctantly; as soon as I
relax that force, they withdraw immediately. It is like throwing a
stone into the air – it goes as high as it can depending on the force of
the throw, but ultimately it falls back to earth. Or consider a weak
bull – it can stand only as long as a man forcefully supports it. But
as soon as he withdraws the support, it slumps onto the ground.
Further, imagine a very strong man who is able to crack a betel nut
between his teeth. But, after sucking ten or twenty very sour
lemons, he would have great difficulty chewing even roasted chanã.
In this manner, it is only when I forcefully engage My vruttis in the
vishays that they remain engaged in them.

5

“So what is the cause of My behaving like this? Well, it is
because My indriyas’ vruttis constantly remain inverted towards My
hrudayãkãsh. In that hrudayãkãsh, I see extremely luminous divine
light. Just as during the monsoon season, clouds cover the entire
sky, similarly, only that light pervades My heart.
The Vachanãmrut

378

6

“Amidst that divine light I see the extremely luminous form of
God. The form is dark, but due to the intensity of the light, it
appears to be rather fair, not dark. The form has two arms and two
legs, not four, eight or a thousand arms; and its appearance is very
captivating. The form is very serene; it has a human form; and it
appears young like a teenager. Sometimes the form in the divine
light is seen standing, sometimes sitting, and at other times, it is
seen walking around. It is surrounded on all four sides by groups of
muktas, who are seated facing Him, and who are engrossed in
looking at that form of God with a fixed gaze. I see that form in its
incarnate form before Me at this very moment. I saw it before I came
into this Satsang fellowship; I could see it when I was in My mother’s
womb; in fact, I could see it even before I entered my mother’s womb.
Moreover, I am speaking to you while sitting there. In fact, I do not
see this village of Gadhadã or even this veranda – I also see all of you
sitting there as well.

7

“Whosoever realises this form will, like Me, never be drawn
towards the pleasures of the vishays. In fact, you also see this form
of God, but you do not comprehend it fully. However, when you come
to comprehend this fact, you will not encounter any difficulty in
subduing the desires for the panchvishays and swabhãvs such as
lust, anger, etc.; they will be subdued easily.

8

“That uniform divine light is referred to as the ãtmã, or
Brahma or Akshardhãm. The form of God within that light is called
the essence of the ãtmã, Parabrahma or Purushottam. It is that
same God who, for the liberation of countless jivas, manifests on this
earth in different yugs in the form of Rãm, Krishna, etc. In this
realm, He appears to be like a human being, but He is not; He is the
lord of Akshardhãm. Shri Krishna Bhagwãn has said in the Gitã,

The Vachanãmrut

379

Ÿ ÃjÊ‚ÿÃ ‚ÍÿÙ¸ Ÿ ‡Ê‡ÊÊæU˜∑§Ù Ÿ ¬Êfl∑§—–
ÿeàflÊ Ÿ ÁŸflÃ¸ãÃ ÃhÊ◊ ¬⁄U◊¢ ◊◊H i
Therefore, even though Shri Krishna Bhagwãn appeared to be like a
human, He still transcends Akshar and is divine.
9

“Whoever meditates on the human form of that God sees the
luminous, divine form seated in Akshardhãm. Such a person who
meditates in this manner, traverses mãyã and attains the highest
state of enlightenment. So, even though God assumes a human body,
He is still divine, and the place where He resides is also nirgun. His
clothes, jewellery, vehicles, attendants, food, drinks, etc. – in fact,
any other objects which become associated with Him – are all nirgun.
One who realises God’s form in this manner does not harbour any
affection for the panchvishays, just like I do not. He becomes
independent.

10

“It is this Purushottam, who transcends Akshar, who is the
cause of all avatãrs. All avatãrs emanate from Purushottam, and
they merge back into Purushottam. When God, after assuming a
human form, leaves this earth to return to His abode, sometimes,
like a human being, His physical body remains on earth – like when
Rukmini took Shri Krishna’s body into her lap and was engulfed
along with it in the fire. Likewise, Rushabhdev’s body was burnt in
a raging forest fire. In other instances, His bones and flesh become
divine and, leaving no remains behind, He returns to His abode.
When He manifests, He may sometimes be born of a woman, or He
may sometimes appear from wherever He wishes. In this manner,
God’s method of birth and death are not necessarily in accordance
with the ways of this world. When you thoroughly realise God as
such, you will encounter no obstacles on the path to liberation.
Without such firm understanding of the nature of God, though, one
will never be able to overcome one’s weaknesses, regardless of the
amount of renunciation one maintains or the number of fasts one
performs.
i Na tad-bhãsayate sooryo na shashãnko na pãvakaha|

Yad-gatvã na nivartante tad-dhãma paramam mama||
My supreme abode is not illumined by Surya [i.e. the sun], or by Chandra [i.e.
the moon] or Agni [i.e. fire]. Having attained it [once], no one returns from it.
Bhagwad Gitã: 15.6

The Vachanãmrut

380

11

“Then you may say, ‘We have firm understanding of that God
just as You have described. Why, then, do our prãns and indriyas
not become engrossed in God?’ Well, one should understand that as
being God’s wish. In reality, such a person has nothing left to
accomplish; he is fulfilled and has reached the culmination of all
spiritual endeavours. If one has such a firm belief in God, then even
if a slight flaw remains in the observance of the vows of non-egotism,
non-avarice, non-lust, non-taste or non-attachment, there is still
nothing to worry about. However, if any deficiency remains in
understanding God, then one’s flaw will never be eradicated.
Therefore, one should attempt to understand this principle by any
means within this lifetime.

12

“If one has completely understood the essence of this discourse,
then regardless of whether one is reborn in a base or elevated life
form due to one’s prãrabdha karmas, still, like Vrutrãsur, one will
not forget this gnãn. Also, when Bharatji was reborn as a deer, he
retained gnãn from his previous life. Such is the profound greatness
of this gnãn. In fact, it is even narrated continuously in the
assemblies of sages such as Nãrad, the Sanakãdik, and Brahmã and
other deities.

13

“However, such discourses regarding the nature of God cannot
be understood by oneself even from the scriptures. Even though
these facts may be in the scriptures, it is only when the Satpurush
manifests on this earth, and one hears them being narrated by him,
that one understands them. They cannot, however, be understood by
one’s intellect alone, even from the scriptures.

14

“One who has such a complete realisation of God, and who is also
able to see the past, present and future, still does not harbour the
slightest self-conceit regarding this fact. He would not grant anyone
a boon, nor would he curse anyone; sometimes, though, he may well
grant a boon or give a curse. At times, he remains fearless, and at
other times, he may even become frightened. Despite that, he would
never allow emotions such as elation or depression to infiltrate his
mind. One who has such an unflinching refuge of God would never
knowingly perform a bad deed.
However, if due to adverse
circumstances an improper deed is performed, a person with such a
refuge would still not fall from the path of liberation. Hence, there is
no other obstacle-free path like that of having the firm refuge of God.

The Vachanãmrut

381

15

“One who has realised this fact harbours only pure intentions.
Just see, I have absolutely no selfish expectations from My
paramhansas and satsangis. The only reason I may call someone,
rebuke someone or send someone away is that if by any means one
realises this fact, it will be very beneficial to them. So, all of you
should firmly imbibe this discourse.

16

“Realise that the form amidst the divine light is this Mahãrãj
visible before you. If you cannot do that, then at least realise,
‘Mahãrãj sees the form which is amidst that aksharrup light.’ Even
if you can understand this much, you will be able to maintain
affection for Me. As a result, you will attain ultimate liberation.
Keep this principle constantly new and fresh in your minds; never
forget it out of complacency. Remember it tomorrow just as it is
today. Keep it vivid in your minds and remember it daily until the
end of your lives. Whenever you talk about God, be sure to implant
the seeds of this principle. This is My command. Moreover, this
principle is so vital that you should remember it daily for the rest of
your lives; in fact, even after you leave this body and attain a divine
form, you should recall it. Indeed, this principle which I have
revealed before you is the very essence of all of the scriptures, and it
is My own firm experience; I have talked to you having seen it with
My very own eyes. In fact, I swear by all of you paramhansas that I
have seen these facts with My own eyes.”

17

In this manner, Shriji Mahãrãj described His true identity,
though indirectly, as Purushottam. Upon hearing this revelation,
the sãdhus and devotees accepted the fact that the form described
amidst the divine light is, in fact, Shriji Mahãrãj Himself.
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-13 || 146 ||

Gadhadã II-14
Nirvikalp Samãdhi
1

On Bhãdarvã sudi 1, Samvat 1878 [28 August 1821], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on the veranda outside the
north-facing rooms near the mandir of Shri Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã
Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was wearing a white khes and
had covered Himself with a white cotton cloth. Around His head He
had tied a white feto in which a chhoglu of red karnikãr flowers had
been inserted. A beautiful, kumkum chãndlo also adorned His
The Vachanãmrut

382

forehead. At that time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees
from various places had gathered before Him.
2

Thereupon Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “When a sãdhu attains
oneness with the form of God, does he attain it through samãdhi, or
can he also attain it through some other method?”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “Once a person has known that this is a
neem tree, he never harbours the doubt in his mind, ‘Is this a neem
tree, or not?’ Similarly, if one has total realisation of God’s form as I
described yesterday, and if one no longer harbours any doubts about
it, and if one’s mind in no way causes one’s conviction of God to
waver regardless of the type of company one may encounter or the
type of scriptures one may hear, then such absolute conviction is
what I call oneness.

4

“Such oneness is attained through profound association with an
Ekãntik Bhakta of God, but not by samãdhi alone. In fact, such
oneness is itself nirvikalp samãdhi. Moreover, the sãdhu who has
such nirvikalp samãdhi is also called nirgun Brahma. Regardless of
whether he follows the path of nivrutti or the path of pravrutti, the
sãdhu who has such an unshakeable conviction is still nirgun. For
example, Nãrad and the Sanakãdik all followed the path of nivrutti,
whereas the Saptarshi, King Janak and others, all followed the path
of pravrutti. However, due to their conviction of God, they should all
be known to be nirgun.

5

“However, those who follow the path of nivrutti but do not have
the conviction of God should be known to be sagun due to their mãyik
gunas. Furthermore, one should realise, ‘This person appears to be a
staunch renunciant, but because he does not have the conviction of
God, he is ignorant and will definitely go to narak.’

6

“On the other hand, a person who has such a conviction of God
will not attain an ill fate – even if some small deficiency remains in
him. In fact, ultimately, he will definitely attain the nirgun state.
But a person without such a conviction of God – even if he is a
sincere renunciant and is vigilantly striving to eradicate lust, anger,
avarice, etc. – will not be able to eradicate those vicious natures by
his efforts alone. Ultimately, he will become evil and go to narak.

7

“Therefore, whoever realises such gnãn of God, even if he has
only a feeble intellect, should still be regarded as possessing much
intellect. On the other hand, if he has not realised such gnãn of God,
The Vachanãmrut

383

then even if he has much intellect, he should still be known as
having no intellect.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-14 || 147 ||

Gadhadã II-15
Keeping Enmity towards One’s Swabhãvs
1

On Bhãdarvã sudi 2, Samvat 1878 [29 August 1821], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a small, silken,
embroidered cloth which had been placed on the veranda outside the
mandir of Shri Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in
Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, an
assembly of munis as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj asked all of the paramhansas a
question: “There is a single thought which, if applied, can destroy
any swabhãv, regardless of how formidable it may be. Without that
thought the swabhãv cannot be eradicated even if one were to apply a
thousand other thoughts. What is that thought? Please answer
according to your understanding.”

3

The paramhansas replied according to their understanding but
none were able to give a complete explanation.

4

Shriji Mahãrãj then said, “Here, I shall explain. If one has an
enemy, and if that enemy were to ruin whatever work one is doing,
or if he were to swear at one’s mother or sister, then one would bear
an intense aversion for him and would employ any means whatsoever
to harm him. If not that, one would at least be extremely happy if
someone else were to harm him. In the very same way, if the inner
enemies of lust, anger, etc., hinder a person while he is striving to
attain liberation, he would harbour the same sort of enmity towards
them as well; moreover, that enmity would never diminish. Whoever
applies such a thought can eradicate all swabhãvs with that thought
alone.

5

“Now, if a sãdhu were to criticise and insult those internal
enemies of lust, anger, etc., then a person who has the
aforementioned thought would not develop an aversion towards that
sãdhu. On the contrary, he would be grateful to the sãdhu and
would feel, ‘This sãdhu is helping me conquer my enemy, and thus
The Vachanãmrut

384

he is an extremely great benefactor.’ A person who has attained such
a thought can destroy all of his inner enemies. Thereafter, no vicious
swabhãvs will be able to remain in his heart. Without this thought,
though, the enemies in the form of the swabhãvs can never be
overpowered, regardless of whichever types of other thoughts one may
apply. Therefore, keeping enmity towards one’s swabhãvs is the
greatest thought of all.”
6

Thereafter, Shriji Mahãrãj asked, “By which characteristics can
one recognise a person who would never deflect from the four
attributes of dharma, vairãgya, gnãn of the ãtmã, and bhakti of God
coupled with knowledge of His greatness?”

7

All of the sãdhus attempted to answer the question according to
their understanding, but no one was able to give a precise answer.

8

So Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “If, from childhood, a person has
such a nature that he would never be suppressed by anyone’s
personality, nor could anyone mock someone or jest in his presence,
nor could anyone make even a mild sarcasm at him, then such a
person would never deflect from dharma, vairãgya, gnãn and the
bhakti of God. Even though his personality may make him appear
arrogant, because of his zeal to attain liberation, he will not leave the
Satsang fellowship under any circumstances.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-15 || 148 ||

Gadhadã II-16
Faith in God and Faith in Dharma
1

On Bhãdarvã sudi 10, Samvat 1878 [7 September 1821], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a wooden cot near the
mandir of Shri Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in
Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, an
assembly of munis as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Some may have faith in
God like Arjun, and others may have faith in dharma like
Yudhishthir. Of these two, if one attempts to maintain faith in God,
faith in dharma may decline; and if one attempts to maintain faith in
dharma, faith in God may decline. So, what means can one employ
so that neither of the two declines?”
The Vachanãmrut

385

3

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “The first canto of the Shrimad Bhãgwat
includes a dialogue between Pruthvi and Dharma that mentions that
God possesses the 39 redemptive attributes8, i.e., truthfulness,
purity, etc. Thus, all forms of dharma are supported by the form of
God. That is precisely why God is called ‘Dharma-dhurandhar’i .

4

“Also in the first canto of the Shrimad Bhãgwat, the Sanakãdik
rishis ask Sutpurãni, ‘In whom did dharma seek refuge after Shri
Krishna Bhagwãn – who was the shield for dharma – reverted to his
abode?’ Thus dharma takes refuge only in God’s form. That is why
when a person keeps faith in God’s form, God comes and dwells in the
person’s heart; consequently, dharma also dwells in his heart.
Therefore, faith in dharma naturally develops in one who possesses
faith in God. However, if one maintains faith in dharma alone, then
faith in God will decline. It is for this reason that one who is
intelligent should certainly maintain resolute faith in God, since
thereby faith in dharma will also remain firm.”

5

Thereafter, Muktãnand Swãmi asked another question: “Can the
desires for the panchvishays be conquered by vairãgya, or can they be
conquered by other means?”

6

Shriji Mahãrãj answered, “Whether or not one has vairãgya, if
one diligently observes the niyams prescribed by God, then the
desires for the panchvishays can be conquered.

7

“With vairãgya, a great deal of effort is required to withdraw
one’s vrutti from sounds; and even then, the ears can still hear. If,
however, the ears are simply plugged, then naturally no sounds will
be heard. Similarly, if one does not touch anything inappropriate,
one automatically conquers touch. In the same way, if one does not
look at anything improper, one automatically conquers sight. Also,
when there is delicious food, if one mixes it together and adds water
therein, and one controls one’s diet, then the sense of taste will
automatically be conquered. If one blocks one’s nose when there is an
alluring smell, one also automatically conquers the sense of smell. In
this manner, the panchvishays can be conquered by observing
niyams. However, if a person does not observe these niyams, then
regardless of how intense his vairãgya may be, or how much gnãn he
may possess, he will not remain stable in any way. Therefore, the
i The term means ‘The Upholder of Dharma.’

The Vachanãmrut

386

only means to overcome the desires for the panchvishays is to follow
the niyams prescribed by God. Furthermore, for those who have
little vairãgya, remaining within niyams is the only way of being
saved, just as an ailing person can be cured only if he controls his
diet and completes his course of medication.”
8

Thereupon Akhandãnand Swãmi asked, “An ailing person has a
fixed number of days over which he must follow his course of
medication. Similarly, is there a definite time period for which one
must endeavour to attain liberation?”

9

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “It takes a person who has feeble
shraddhã many lives to reach the culmination of his spiritual
endeavours. In fact, the Bhagwad Gitã states:

•Ÿ∑§¡ã◊‚¢Á‚hSÃÃÙ ÿÊÁÃ ¬⁄UÊ¢ ªÁÃ◊˜H i
This verse explains that only a yogi who has become realised after
many lives attains the highest state of enlightenment. This has been
said for those who have less shraddhã.
10

“In comparison, one who has strong shraddhã becomes
enlightened immediately. This is also mentioned in the Bhagwad
Gitã:

üÊhÊflÊÑ°÷Ã ôÊÊŸ¢ Ãà¬⁄U— ‚¢ÿÃÁãº˝ÿ—–
ôÊÊŸ¢ ‹?äflÊ ¬⁄UÊ¢ ‡ÊÊÁãÃ◊Áø⁄UáÊÊÁœªë¿UÁÃH ii
The meaning of this verse is, ‘He whose indriyas are under control
and who also possesses shraddhã, attains gnãn. Upon attaining that
gnãn, such a person immediately attains the highest state of
enlightenment.’ Therefore, one who has intense shraddhã reaches
the culmination of his spiritual endeavours earlier, whereas one who
has weak shraddhã reaches that state after many lives. For
example, if a man is going to Kãshi but walks only two steps
throughout the day, it will obviously take him many days to reach
Kãshi. If, on the other hand, he starts walking 20 miles a day, it will
take him only a few days to reach Kãshi. In the same way, if a
i Aneka-janma-sansiddhas-tatoh yãti parãm gatim||

Bhagwad Gitã: 6.45
ii Shraddhãvãl-labhate gnãnam tat-paraha sayyatendriyaha|

Gnãnam labdhvã parãm shãntim-achirenãdhigachchhati||
Bhagwad Gitã: 4.39

The Vachanãmrut

387

person has abundant shraddhã, then even if he has only recently
become a satsangi, he will still become great. Conversely, a person
who has little shraddhã, even though he may have joined the
Satsang fellowship a long time ago, still remains weak.”
11

Then Shri Gurucharanratãnand Swãmi asked, “If those who
have less shraddhã attain liberation after many lives, where do they
stay until then?”

12

Shriji Mahãrãj answered, “They go and reside in the beautiful
realms of the deities. This is because when that devotee meditated on
God, he used to look towards God and God used to look towards him
as well. But God was aware of the vishays the devotee thought about
and had affection for while meditating on Him. Thus, when the
devotee leaves his body, God sends him to a realm full of the vishays
for which he had a passion. God also issues the following command
to kãl: ‘You should not interfere in this devotee’s indulgence in the
vishays.’ As a result, that devotee remains in Devlok and enjoys
those pleasures. Thereafter, when he returns to Mrutyulok, he
attains liberation eventually after many lives.”

13

Akhandãnand Swãmi then asked another question: “What are
the characteristics of one who possesses intense shraddhã?”

14

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “Whenever a person who has intense
shraddhã wants to engage in an activity related to God – such as
going for the darshan of God, or listening to talks and discourses
related to God, or performing His mãnsi pujã, etc., then to be able to
do so, he would become very hasty in carrying out his bodily
activities such as bathing, etc. Also, if I were to write a letter
changing a particular religious vow, he would be eager to comply
with it. In addition, even if he were a senior person, he would become
as impatient as a child to have the darshan of God. One who has
such characteristics should be known as one who possesses intense
shraddhã.

15

“One who has such shraddhã is able to immediately conquer all
of one’s indriyas. However, the indriyas of one who has little
shraddhã on the path of God are acutely attached to the vishays.
Moreover, no matter how hard one tries to hide it, everyone still
realises the fact that this person’s indriyas are very acutely attracted
towards the vishays.”

The Vachanãmrut

388

16

Thereafter Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “The indriyas are like the
wind – even though the wind cannot be seen, it can be inferred that
the wind is blowing by the way in which it shakes the trees.
Similarly, the vruttis of the indriyas cannot be seen, but everyone
realises that they surge towards the vishays. If a person deceitfully
attempts to hide this, then realising him to be deceitful, others will
condemn him all the more. Therefore, in no way can one conceal the
acute cravings of one’s indriyas to indulge in the vishays.”

17

Muktãnand Swãmi then asked, “How can those acute cravings
of the indriyas to indulge in the vishays be eradicated?”

18

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “The only means to eradicate the
acuteness of the indriyas is to force the indriyas to observe the
niyams for renunciants and householders as prescribed by God. The
acuteness of the indriyas automatically diminishes as a result.
When one does not allow the five indriyas, i.e., the ears, the skin, the
eyes, the tongue and the nose to wander, the diet of the indriyas
becomes pure, after which the antahkaran becomes pure as well.
Therefore, regardless of whether a person possesses intense vairãgya
or not, if he conquers his indriyas and keeps them within the niyams
prescribed by God, he can conquer the desires for the vishays more
thoroughly than one does so with intense vairãgya. Thus, one should
firmly abide by the niyams prescribed by God.”

19

Again, Akhandãnand Swãmi asked, “If one has weak shraddhã,
how can it become stronger?”

20

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “If one can realise the greatness of God
then even if one has weak shraddhã, it will grow stronger. For
example, one would never be attracted to earthen utensils that are
used for drinking water. However, if those utensils were made of
gold then one would naturally be attracted to them. Similarly, if one
realises the greatness of the discourses, devotional songs, etc., related
to God, then one’s shraddhã in God and in those activities will
naturally increase. Therefore, one should employ whichever method
is necessary to understand the greatness of God. If one does employ
such a method, then even if one has no shraddhã at all, still one will
develop shraddhã; and if one has feeble shraddhã, it will become
stronger.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-16 || 149 ||

The Vachanãmrut

389

Gadhadã II-17
The Elements in the Form of God; ‘Sthitapragna’
1

On the night of Ãso vadi 11, Samvat 1878 [21 October 1821],
Swãmi Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on an ornate seat on
the veranda outside the rooms near the mandir of Shri
Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was
dressed entirely in white clothes. Two torches were lit in front of
Him. At that time, while devotional songs were being sung,
paramhansas as well as devotees from various places had gathered
before Him in an assembly.

2

Then Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Please stop the devotional songs now
and let us begin a question-answer session.”

3

Thereupon all the munis replied, “Very well, Mahãrãj.”

4

Shriji Mahãrãj then posed a question: “Some devotees
understand the form of God as being composed of the 24 elements2 of
mãyã, while some understand it as being composed purely of
chaitanya, free of mãyik elements. Of these two types of devotees,
whose understanding is correct and whose understanding is
incorrect?”

5

Muktãnand Swãmi replied, “The understanding of one who
considers God’s form as being composed of the 24 mãyik elements is
incorrect. The understanding of one who considers God’s form as
being composed purely of chaitanya, free of mãyik elements, is
correct.”

6

Shriji Mahãrãj then said, “Adherents of the Sãnkhya philosophy
claim that there are 24 elements. According to that doctrine, there
are 23 elements, and the 24th is kshetragna – in the form of jivaishwar – which is chaitanya. The 24 elements have been described
in this manner. This is because kshetra and kshetragna have a
mutual dependence on each other. Without kshetragna, kshetra
cannot be described, and without kshetra, kshetragna cannot be
described. For this reason, jiva and ishwar have been included with
the elements, while God has been described as the refuge of both
kshetra and kshetragna. In this case, then, how can the mãyik
elements be described as being distinct from God? For example, four
elements reside within ãkãsh, yet ãkãsh is unaffected by any of their
flaws. In the same way, not a single flaw of the mãyik elements
influences the form of God. So what is the inconsistency in believing
The Vachanãmrut

390

that God’s form is composed of the 24 elements? Does claiming that
God’s form is not composed of the elements prevent inconsistencies?
This is how I understand it.”
7

Then Dinãnãth Bhatt asked, “Should one who wishes to
meditate on God’s form understand it as being composed of the
elements or understand it as not being composed of the elements?”

8

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “One who understands God’s form as
being composed of the elements is a sinner, and one who understands
God’s form as not being composed of the elements is also a sinner.
Those who are devotees of God do not at all like to senselessly quibble
over whether or not God’s form is composed of the elements. A
devotee realises, ‘God is God. There is no scope for dividing or
discarding any part of Him. That very God is the ãtmã of countless
brahmãnds.’ One who has no doubts at all regarding the nature of
God should be known to have attained the nirvikalp state. One with
such stable understanding should be known as ‘sthitapragna’ i .
Moreover, God redeems all the sins of a person who has such stable
understanding regarding God.
“In the Bhagwad Gitã, God has said to Arjun,

9

‚fl¸œ◊Ê¸ã¬Á⁄UàÿÖÿ ◊Ê◊∑¢§ ‡Ê⁄UáÊ¢ fl˝¡–
•„¢ àflÊ ‚fl¸¬Ê¬èÿÙ ◊ÙˇÊÁÿcÿÊÁ◊ ◊Ê ‡ÊÈø—H ii
10

“In fact, it is a usual custom in this world that an intelligent
person will not notice a fault in someone who serves the person’s
major self-interests. For example, to serve her self-interest, a woman
will not notice any faults in her husband. This also applies to other
householders who, if they have intense self-interest in their
relatives – brother, nephew, son, etc. – do not notice their faults. In
the same way, if one realises that God serves one’s own self-interest;
i.e., God relieves His devotees of their sins and ignorance and grants
i

Literally, ‘sthitapragna’ means ‘one with a stable mind’ but here Shriji Mahãrãj
gives His own, unique definition.
ii Sarva-dharmãn-parityajya mãm-ekam sharanam vraja|
Aham tvã sarva-pãpebhyo mokshayishyãmi mã shuchaha||
Abandon all [other] forms of dharma and surrender only unto me. I shall deliver
you from all sins; [so] do not lament.
Bhagwad Gitã: 18.66

The Vachanãmrut

391

them liberation, then one will never perceive flaws in God in any
way. For example, when Shukji narrated the Rãs-panchãdhyãyi,
King Parikshit raised the following doubt: ‘Why did God associate
with other women?’ Shukji, however, did not have the slightest
doubt. Even the gopis, with whom God engaged in amorous actions,
did not doubt by thinking, ‘If he is God, why does he behave like
this?’ They did not entertain any such doubts. Moreover, when God
went to the home of Kubjã, he took Uddhavji along with him, yet
Uddhavji did not have any doubts at all. Moreover, when Uddhavji
was sent to Vraj, he still did not entertain any doubts on hearing the
words of the gopis. On the contrary, he profoundly realised the
eminence of the gopis.
11

“Therefore, the understanding of a person who has developed an
unflinching refuge of God will not become distorted, regardless of
whether he is very learned in the scriptures, or he is naïve.
Moreover, the greatness of a staunch devotee of God can only be
realised by one who is a devotee of God. Regardless of whether one is
learned in the scriptures or is naïve, only one with a firm
understanding of God realises the greatness of a devotee of God, and
only he recognises a devotee possessing a staunch understanding. On
the other hand, non-believers in the world, regardless of whether they
are pundits or fools, are unable to develop such firm understanding of
God. Moreover, they do not recognise a devotee possessing a staunch
understanding, nor do they realise the greatness of a devotee of God.
Therefore, only a devotee of God can recognise another devotee of God,
and only he can realise his greatness. For example, Uddhavji
realised the profound greatness of the gopis. Likewise, the gopis
realised the greatness of Uddhavji.

12

“Although Purushottam Bhagwãn is the Kshetragna of all
kshetragnas, He is still not subject to change. Moreover, the
disturbances of objects that cause disturbances – such as mãyã and
other factors – do not influence Purushottam Bhagwãn. In fact, if
the disturbances of sthul, sukshma and kãran do not influence a
person who has realised the ãtmã, what can be said about them not
influencing Purushottam Bhagwãn? Therefore, God is certainly not
subject to change; He is absolutely uninfluenced.

13

“A devotee of God who understands God’s form in this manner
should be known to be ‘sthitapragna’. Just as a person who has
realised his ãtmã is called ‘sthitapragna’, a devotee of God who
The Vachanãmrut

392

behaves as follows is called ‘sthitapragna’ with regards to the form of
Purushottam: Entertaining no doubts at all regarding the nature of
God, he glorifies God’s weaknesses in exactly the same way that he
glorifies His strengths. He also glorifies those actions and incidents
of God that appear to be inappropriate, in exactly the same way that
he glorifies actions and incidents that are appropriate – without
harbouring
any
doubts
about
the
appropriateness
or
inappropriateness of those actions and incidents. Such a devotee
should be known as being ‘sthitapragna’ with regards to the nature of
Purushottam. One who has developed such a firm conviction of the
nature of Purushottam has nothing more left to understand.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-17 || 150 ||

Gadhadã II-18
Nãstiks and Shushka-Vedãntis
1

On Mãgshar vadi 6, Samvat 1878 [7 December 1821], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a cushion with a
cylindrical pillow that had been placed in His residence in Dãdã
Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was wearing a white khes and
had covered Himself with a white cotton cloth. On top of that cloth,
He had covered Himself with a richly embroidered blanket as well.
He had also tied a white feto around His head. At that time, Prãgji
Dave was reading a scripture before Him, and paramhansas as well
as devotees from various places had gathered before Him in an
assembly.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Having thought over it from all
aspects, I have come to the conclusion that of all the so-called evil
company in the world, the company which is worse than all others is
that of those who do not have bhakti towards God, or the faith in
their hearts that God loves His devotees, is the master of all, is the
uplifter of the wretched, and is also the redeemer of sinners. Two
such schools of thought are prevalent in this world that share these
beliefs: one is that of the nãstiks, and the other is that of the
shushka-Vedãntis. Both are extreme forms of evil company. Now,
even if a person has committed the five grave sins10, if he has faith in
God, then at some time or another he will be redeemed. In fact, even
if a person has committed the grave sins of killing a child,
slaughtering a cow, killing a woman, etc., then he too can be
The Vachanãmrut

393

redeemed at some point in time. However, one who has come to
accept either of these two sets of beliefs will never be redeemed. This
is because such a person’s understanding is contrary to that of the
Vedas, the Shãstras and the Purãns.
3

“Of the two, the nãstiks believe that Rãmchandraji and Shri
Krishna Bhagwãn were actually only kings; and because Shri
Krishna killed demons and committed adultery, he has been
consigned to the third narak. Thus, in no way do they consider Shri
Krishna Bhagwãn, who is the redeemer of sinners and the uplifter of
the wretched, as being God. Rather, they believe their liberation to
be through karmas; that is, while performing karmas, when one
attains keval-gnãn, one becomes God. In this way, they believe that
there are countless Gods. So, according to the belief of the nãstiks,
there is no one, beginningless God, by whose worship a jiva is
released from the bondage of births and deaths. Thus, that belief is
not in accordance with the Vedas.

4

“The shushka-Vedãntis believe that Brahma itself has assumed
the form of the jivas – just as in the relationship between the sun and
its reflection. Thus, when one realises, ‘I am Brahma,’ one has no
further spiritual endeavours left to perform. Then, when one has
become God, one need not worship anyone. Thinking this, they no
longer have fear in committing sins. Moreover, they believe, ‘We
have attained the nirgun path, so we will not have to take birth
again.’ However, the shushka-Vedãntis do not examine their own
understanding which implies that nirgun Brahma, which
transgresses mãyã, will also have to pass through births and deaths.
This is because they claim that Brahma itself has assumed the form
of all mobile and immobile objects. This means that just as a jiva
has to undergo births and deaths, Brahma also has to undergo births
and deaths. While they think, ‘We will be released from births and
deaths,’ they do not realise, ‘According to our own beliefs, births and
deaths have become a reality for Brahma itself. Therefore, if we do
develop deep understanding, at the most, we shall realise ourselves to
be brahmaswarup. But even then, the cycle of births and deaths will
still not be dispelled.’ Thus, by their own beliefs, liberation is
refuted. Nevertheless, no one examines this. On the contrary, they
boast, ‘We are brahmaswarup, so whom do we need to worship?
Before whom do we have to bow?’ Thinking this, they become
extremely arrogant. Even though they have not truly understood
anything, they still harbour vanity of their gnãn. But they do not
The Vachanãmrut

394

realise that their own liberation is refuted by their own beliefs.
Moreover, they convert whosoever keeps their company into such a
fool as well.
5

“However, devotees possessing true gnãn, such as Nãrad, the
Sanakãdik and Shukji, constantly meditate on God, chant His holy
name and sing devotional songs. Even the niranna-muktas in
Shwetdwip, who are brahmaswarup and who can control kãl,
continuously meditate on God, chant His holy name and sing
devotional songs related to Him.
They also offer puja, apply
sandalwood paste and do prostrations to Him.
Despite being
aksharrup, they behave as the servants of Purushottam Bhagwãn,
who transcends Akshar. Also, the residents of Badrikãshram,
including Uddhav, Tanu Rishi, and the other munis, perform
austerities and continuously offer bhakti to God. The shushkaVedãntis, on the other hand, are completely oriented around their
bodies; they do not meditate on God, nor do they chant the name of
God, nor do they bow before God. Compared to the power and gnãn of
Nãrad, the Sanakãdik and Shukji; and compared to the power and
gnãn of the niranna-muktas who reside in Shwetdwip; and compared
to the power and gnãn of the rishis who reside in Badrikãshram,
these shushka-Vedãntis do not possess even a millionth of a fraction
of such power and gnãn. Nevertheless, they equate themselves with
God. Indeed, they are absolutely ignorant. In fact, they are the most
ignorant of all ignorant people. Even after spending countless
millions of years in the pits of narak suffering the torments of Yam,
they will still not be released.

6

“Thus, to associate with such people is the very definition of evil
company. Just as there is no deed greater than keeping the company
of the Satpurush, conversely, there is no sin graver than keeping the
company of ignorant people such as the shushka-Vedãntis.
Therefore, one who aspires to attain liberation should in no way keep
the company of a nãstik or a shushka-Vedãnti.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-18 || 151 ||

The Vachanãmrut

395

Gadhadã II-19
Writing a Letter Having Become Distressed by
Hearing Shushka-Vedãnta Scriptures
1

At daybreak on Mãgshar vadi 14, Samvat 1878 [23 December
1821], Swãmi Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj arrived at the residential
hall of the paramhansas in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.
There, in a distressed mood, He sat down on a cushion with a
cylindrical pillow and refused to talk to or even look at anyone. The
white feto tied around His head had loosened and become undone, yet
He paid no attention to it. In this manner, He sat extremely
distressed for a few minutes. Tears had begun to flow from His eyes.

2

Then, addressing the paramhansas, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “To
learn about the beliefs of those possessing shushka-gnãn, I listened to
their scriptures. Merely hearing them, though, has caused much
grief in My heart. Why? Because by listening to the shushkaVedãnta scriptures, the upãsanã of God is dispelled from one’s mind,
and a sense of equivalence arises in one’s heart, whereby one begins
to worship deities. By listening to the words of those shushkaVedãntis, one’s mind becomes extremely corrupted. In fact, even
though I listened to the principles of shushka-Vedãnta with a specific
purpose, doing so has brought Me much grief.”

3

Having said this, Shriji Mahãrãj became very dejected. After
remaining disheartened for a long time, He wiped the tears from His
eyes with His hands and said, “I went to sleep last night after
listening to Rãmãnuj’s commentary on the Bhagwad Gitã. Then, I
had a dream in which I went to Golok, where I saw countless
attendants of God. Of these, some serve God; they appeared to be
still. Others sing devotional songs related to God; in fact, they sing
the devotional songs composed by Muktãnand Swãmi and
Brahmãnand Swãmi. In the process of singing such devotional
songs, they sway in the same way as a person who sings and sways
in euphoria due to intoxication. Then, I also joined those who were
singing and began to sing devotional songs. While singing, the
following thought arose: ‘One who shuns such loving bhakti of God
and such upãsanã of God, and claims to possess gnãn, believing, ‘I
myself am God,’ is extremely wicked.’”

4

Having said this, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Let us write a letter to
send to the satsangis in various places so that they never lapse in
The Vachanãmrut

396

observing dharma and in offering bhakti to God in any way, and so
that their mind is never dislodged from their Ishtadev, Shri Krishna
Nãrãyan.”
5

‘Written by Swãmi Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj.
All
paramhansas and all satsangis – male and female – please accept
sincerest ‘Nãrãyan’ from Me. I am issuing the following as a
command: The avatãr of Shri Krishna Nãrãyan – Purushottam
Bhagwãn – manifests among humans, deities, etc., for the purpose of
establishing dharma, uprooting adharma, and giving darshan to and
protecting His ekãntik bhaktas who possess the four virtues, i.e.,
dharma in the form of brahmacharya, non-violence, etc.; ãtmãrealisation; vairãgya; and bhakti coupled with the knowledge of God’s
greatness. Therefore, one should have a singular conviction of that
avatãr – like that of a woman who observes the vow of fidelity – just
as Sitãji was convinced of Rãmchandraji’s flawlessness. One should
also lovingly perform the mãnsi pujã of that God and physically offer
to Him the nine types of bhakti. If that avatãr of Shri Krishna
Nãrãyan is not present on this earth, then one should perform puja of
His form mentally and also physically by offering sandalwood paste,
tulsi, flowers and other such auspicious offerings.

6

‘Moreover, one should offer upãsanã only to God and not to any
deity; if one does, then that is a grave sin, and thereby, one’s vow of
fidelity is lost and one’s bhakti becomes like that of a prostitute. So,
one should offer bhakti to God in the manner of Sitã and Rukmini.
One should meditate only on that God and not on any deity. Nor
should one meditate on a sãdhu, even if he has attained an elevated
state and mastered samãdhi.

7

‘Furthermore, all should strictly abide by the dharma of their
caste and ãshram. All men who firmly abide by this injunction of
Mine will develop resolute bhakti towards Shri Krishna Nãrãyan like
that of Nãrad. All women who accept this injunction of Mine will
develop resolute bhakti towards Shri Krishna Nãrãyan like that of
Lakshmiji and the gopis such as Rãdhikãji, etc. Conversely, the
bhakti of those who do not accept these words of Mine will become
like that of a prostitute.

8
9

‘Written on Mãgshar vadi 14, Samvat 1878.’
After writing this letter, Shriji Mahãrãj had it sent to all
satsangis residing in various places.
The Vachanãmrut

397

|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-19 || 152 ||

Gadhadã II-20
How Do the Faculty of Knowing and
the Strength of the Indriyas of
One Who Has Mastered Samãdhi Increase?
1

On Posh vadi 14, Samvat 1878 [22 January 1822], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting in front of the mandir of Shri
Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was
wearing a white khes and had covered Himself with a white cotton
cloth. On top of that cloth, He had covered Himself with a blanket of
chhint as well. He had also tied a white pãgh around His head. At
that time, while some paramhansas were singing devotional songs to
the accompaniment of a tãl and mrudang, munis as well as devotees
from various places had gathered before Him in an assembly.

2

Then, addressing the paramhansas, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “At My
residence today, I asked a question to Somlã Khãchar and the other
devotees who stay with Me. I would like all of the paramhansas to
get together and answer that question.”

3

The paramhansas requested, “Mahãrãj, may we please hear that
question.”

4

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “A person who masters samãdhi
attains a spiritual state that transcends mãyã. He also has firm
rapport with the form of God. Therefore, that person’s faculty of
knowing as well as the strength of his body and indriyas should
increase. Why? Because the 24 elements2 that have been produced
from mãyã have a form that is both jad and chaitanya; they cannot
be said to be only jad, nor can they be said to be only chaitanya.
Also, the strength in each of the elements cannot be said to be equal.
There is a greater degree of awareness in the antahkaran than there
is in the indriyas. Likewise, there is a greater degree of awareness
in the jiva – the drashtã of the indriyas and antahkaran – than there
is in the antahkaran.

5

“When that jiva experiences samãdhi, it abandons its role as the
drashtã of the indriyas and antahkaran, and like Brahma – who
transcends mãyã – that jiva becomes chaitanya, its rapport with the
form of God being maintained. Now, regarding those who have
The Vachanãmrut

398

mastered samãdhi, some people think, ‘Whoever experiences
samãdhi loses even the knowledge he had previously.’ So, do the
faculty of knowing, and the strength of the body and indriyas of one
who has mastered samãdhi increase or not? That is the question.”
6

The paramhansas then answered according to their intellect, but
no one was able to answer Shriji Mahãrãj’s question satisfactorily.

7

Then Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Here, I will answer. The answer to
the question is that Brahma, who is the witness, enters the
brahmãnd – which is composed of the 24 elements, and which was
produced from mãyã – and makes it chaitanya, giving it the powers
to perform all activities. The nature of that Brahma is such that
when it enters an object that is as jad as wood or stone, that object
becomes such that it can move. When the jiva attains likeness to
that Brahma through samãdhi, then that jiva can also be said to be
brahmarup. As a result, its gnãn also increases.

8

“With regards to the strength of the indriyas, one who practises
yoga coupled with austerities, nivrutti dharma, and vairãgya attains
yogic powers like that of Shukji. On the other hand, there may be a
person whose austerities, observance of nivrutti dharma, and
vairãgya are at an ordinary level, and who follows the path of
pravrutti in the form of dharma, arth and kãm. In his case,
although he may experience samãdhi, only his gnãn will increase,
but the strength of his indriyas does not increase and he does not
attain yogic powers. In fact, even though a person may possess gnãn
like King Janak, those who follow the path of pravrutti do not attain
yogic powers in the manner of Nãrad, the Sanakãdik and Shukji. On
the other hand, one who has attained yogic powers can travel to God’s
abodes such as Shwetdwip, etc., in his very body, and can also travel
to all places in this realm and beyond. But for those who follow the
path of pravrutti, only their gnãn increases – like King Janak; but it
does not decrease.

9

“In fact, what happens is as described by Shri Krishna Bhagwãn
in the Gitã in the verse:

ÿÊ ÁŸ‡ÊÊ ‚fl¸÷ÍÃÊŸÊ¢ ÃSÿÊ¢ ¡ÊªÁÃ¸ ‚¢ÿ◊Ë–
ÿSÿÊ¢ ¡Êª˝ÁÃ ÷ÍÃÊÁŸ ‚Ê ÁŸ‡ÊÊ ¬‡ÿÃÙ ◊ÈŸ—H i
i Yã nishã sarva-bhootãnãm tasyãm jãgarti sayyamee|

The Vachanãmrut

399

The meaning of this verse is: ‘A self-controlled person is awake to
that to which all other beings are asleep, and that to which all other
beings are awake, a self-controlled person is asleep.’ Specifically,
then, a person whose vision is facing inwards towards the ãtmã has
no regard for his body, indriyas or antahkaran. On seeing this,
however, a person who is ignorant thinks, ‘The gnãn of one who
experiences samãdhi decreases.’ As a result, if a person under the
influence of rajogun, tamogun or impure sattvagun attempts to
answer this question, then he would certainly think that the gnãn of
one who experiences samãdhi does decrease. However, he does not
realise, ‘I constantly believe my self to be the body and am speaking
out of foolishness.’
10

“Therefore, the gnãn of a person who experiences samãdhi still
increases even though he behaves distinctly from the body, indriyas
and antahkaran.
Even after he returns to the indriyas and
antahkaran, the gnãn obtained during samãdhi is still not destroyed.
As for a person who takes up austerities, nivrutti dharma and
vairãgya – abandoning the path of pravrutti – just as his gnãn has
increased, similarly, the strength of his indriyas and antahkaran will
increase as well. Also, he will attain the status of a realised yogi like
Nãrad, the Sanakãdik and Shukji.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-20 || 153 ||

Gadhadã II-21
The Main Principle
1

On Fãgun sudi Punam, Samvat 1878 [7 March 1822], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting in front of the mandir of Shri
Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was
wearing a white khes and had covered Himself with a white cotton
cloth. He had also tied a white pãgh around His head. At that time,
Premãnand Swãmi and other paramhansas were singing a
Vishnupad before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Please stop the devotional
songs. I wish to speak to all of you, so please listen attentively.” He
Yasyãm jãgrati bhootãni sã nishã pashyato munehe||
Bhagwad Gitã: 2.69

The Vachanãmrut

400

then said, “I, Myself, have attentively listened to all of the scriptures
which Vyãsji has written regarding the attainment of liberation. The
main principle prevalent in all those scriptures, and the only
principle for the liberation of the jiva is simply this: The sole creator,
sustainer and destroyer of this entire cosmos is God.
3

“Moreover, in all of those scriptures, there are talks of the divine
actions and incidents of either God or His Sant. So, liberation cannot
be attained just by the observance of the dharma of one’s caste and
ãshram, or through its fruits in the form of dharma, arth and kãm.
This is because the observance of the dharma of one’s caste and
ãshram on its own may bring worldly reputation and physical
comforts – but that is all. For the purpose of liberation, however,
realising God to be the all-doer is the only means.

4

“In addition, if a person realises the greatness of manifest God
and His Bhakta-Sant in exactly the same way as he realises the
greatness of past avatãrs of God such as Rãm, Krishna, etc., as well
as the greatness of past sãdhus such as Nãrad, the Sanakãdik,
Shukji, Jadbharat, Hanumãn, Uddhav, etc. – then nothing remains
to be understood on the path of liberation.

5

“Whether this principle is understood after being told once, or
after being told a thousand times; whether it is understood today, or
after a thousand years, there is no option but to understand it. Even
if one were to ask Nãrad, the Sanakãdik, Shukji, Brahmã and Shiv,
since they are wise, even they, using many different techniques,
would point to the manifest form of God and the manifest form of the
Sant as being the only granters of liberation. They would also
explain that the greatness of the manifest form of God and the
manifest form of the Sant is exactly the same as the greatness of past
forms of God and the Sant.

6

“A person who has such a firm conviction has grasped all of the
fundamental principles. What is more, he will never fall from the
path of liberation. Brahmã, Shiv, Bruhaspati, Parãshar, etc., may
have fallen from the path of dharma due to lust, anger, etc., but
because they had the same conviction in and knowledge of the
greatness of the manifest form of God and the manifest form of the
Sant as they had of their past forms, they did not fall from the path
of liberation. Thus, the essence of all of the scriptures is this very
fact.”
The Vachanãmrut

401

7

In the evening of that same day, Swãmi Shri Sahajãnandji
Mahãrãj mounted His horse in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã
and came to Lakshmivãdi. There, He sat on a large, decorated cot on
the platform under the mango tree. He was wearing a white khes
and had covered Himself with a white cotton cloth. He had also tied
around His head a white pãgh that was adorned by a tassel of yellow
flowers. Bunches of mogrã flowers were placed upon His ears, and a
garland of mogrã flowers was also placed around His neck. At that
time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees from various places
had gathered before Him.

8

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Please listen, I wish to ask all
of you a question. During the dream state, when the jiva sees a
creation and indulges in the pleasures of that creation, does the jiva
itself become the form of the creation? Or does the jiva create the
creation in its dream by its own will? Also, in the same way as the
jiva, the ishwars such as Brahmã, etc., also experience creations
during their dream state. Do they themselves become the form of the
creation? Or do they create it by their own will? Or does God, who
transcends both jiva and ishwar, create the creations experienced in
their dreams?”

9

Everyone attempted to answer the question according to his level
of intelligence, but no one was able to offer a precise explanation.

10

Shriji Mahãrãj then explained, “Neither the jiva nor ishwar
creates the creations experienced during the dream state, nor do they
become the form of those creations themselves. In reality, it is God –
who transcends both jiva and ishwar, and who is also the giver of the
fruits of one’s karmas – who creates the world experienced in dreams
according to the karmas of the particular jiva or ishwar.

11

“The unstable and illusory nature of dreams is due to their
region of origin. The throat is such that in that place, countless
types of such creations can be seen – just as when an oil lamp is lit in
one place within a mandir decorated with mirrors, countless oil
lamps would be seen. Therefore, due to the location of its origin, the
throat, a single thought can be experienced in countless ways.”

12

Shriji Mahãrãj then said, “A person possessing gnãn
understands only the influence of place to be predominant when there
is the predominance of place; and when the influence of time is
predominant, he understands only time to be predominant; and when
the influence of karma is predominant, he understands only karma to
The Vachanãmrut

402

be predominant; and when God’s influence is predominant, he
understands only God to be predominant. In contrast, a fool, once he
has understood one factor, considers that alone to be the chief factor.
If he has understood time, he considers time to be the chief factor; if
he has understood karma, he considers karma to be the chief factor;
and if he has understood mãyã, he considers mãyã to be the chief
factor. But such a fool does not know how to distinguish between the
different predominating factors prevalent in different circumstances.
A person with gnãn, on the other hand, understands the
predominance of various factors based on the circumstances.
13

“In fact, it is God who is the inspirer of everything – of place,
time, karma and mãyã. It is He Himself who allows the factors of
place, time, etc., to be predominant. Thus, they are all dependent
upon God – just as the shishumãr chakra is dependent on the support
of the Dhruv star; and just as all the subjects of a kingdom are
dependent on their king. Furthermore, in a kingdom, the minister
and secretaries can only do as much as their king allows them to do;
when the king does not allow it, they cannot do even the smallest of
tasks. In the same way, the factors of place, time, karma and mãyã
can only do as much as God allows them to do; they cannot do a
single thing against the wish of God. Therefore, only God is the alldoer.”

14

After delivering this discourse, Shriji Mahãrãj returned to the
darbãr.
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-21 || 154 ||

Gadhadã II-22
Two Armies; The Installation of Nar-Nãrãyan
1

On Fãgun vadi 10, Samvat 1878 [19 March 1822], Shriji
Mahãrãj awoke in the middle of the night and sat facing south on a
large, decorated cot in front of the mandir of Shri Vãsudevnãrãyan in
Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in
white clothes. At that time, He called all of the sãdhus and devotees
together, and so they gathered before Him in an assembly.

2

Addressing the sãdhus, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “I wish to talk, so
please listen. When two armies are prepared for combat and both
have implanted their flags opposite each other, in their minds both
The Vachanãmrut

403

feel, ‘We will capture their flag and shall raise our own in its place.’
But they never think, ‘Along the way to the enemy’s flag many heads
will roll, and rivers of blood will flow.’ They are never afraid in this
manner. This is because those who are brave are not afraid of dying.
A coward, however, harbours thousands of thoughts of fleeing. He
also thinks, ‘If our army wins, we shall loot our opponents’ wealth
and weapons.’ The brave soldiers of both kings, however, are not
afraid of dying, nor do they have greedy motives to loot. Instead, they
have only one desire – to capture the opponent’s flag and ensure their
own victory.
3

“Now, in this example, the flag represents the abode of God, and
the brave soldiers of the kings represent the staunch devotees of God.
Regardless of whether they encounter honours or insults in this
world; regardless of whether they encounter bodily comforts or
miseries; regardless of whether their bodies remain healthy or
unhealthy; and regardless of whether their bodies survive or die,
staunch devotees of God never harbour timid thoughts such as, ‘We
will suffer this much pain,’ or ‘we will enjoy this much happiness.’
Neither of these two types of thoughts arises within their minds.
Such devotees firmly believe, ‘We want to attain the abode of God
within this very lifetime; we do not want to become enticed by
anything along the way.’

4

“On the other hand, a devotee of God who identifies his self with
the body is represented by the coward soldiers. While worshipping
God, he harbours thousands of timid thoughts such as, ‘If the
religious vows become strict, I will not be able to survive; only if they
are easy to observe will I be able to survive.’ He also thinks, ‘If I
employ this method, I shall be happy even in worldly life. Also, if it
is possible, I shall survive passively in the Satsang fellowship.’ Such
a devotee represents the coward. A staunch, brave devotee of God,
however, never has any types of desires related to the body or the
world.”

5

Having said this, Shriji Mahãrãj then began to narrate an
experience of His own. “When I went to Amdãvãd to perform the
installation ceremony of Shri Narnãrãyandev, thousands of people
had gathered for the festival. Following the completion of the
installation of Shri Narnãrãyandev, and after thousands of Brãhmins
from Amdãvãd had been fed, I departed from there and spent the
night in Jetalpur. There, I began to think, ‘I want to forget all
The Vachanãmrut

404

memories of all of those people and all of the activities that I saw.’ In
doing this, My heart felt intense grief, and as a result, I became ill.
From there, I then went to Dholkã, where I spent the night. Then,
walking from Dholkã with the same thought in mind, I reached the
forest of Ganesh Dholkã near the village of Koth and spent the night
there. I began to think so much that I forgot all about My body.
While thinking, I forgot all of the activities, and dispelled all those
thoughts in such a manner that it was as if I had not even stayed at
Lake Kãnkariã, and as if there had been no festival – no thoughts
remained at all.
6

“After those worldly thoughts had subsided, I began to look
within. I began to see transcendental wonders and also the pleasures
of the deities. I began to see countless types of celestial vehicles,
celestial maidens, clothes and ornaments – just as if I were seeing
them here in Mrutyulok. In My heart, however, I did not like
anything except God. Moreover, just as the panchvishays here
appear to be insignificant to Me – with My mind never being
tempted – in the same way, My mind was not tempted anywhere
from Devlok all the way to Brahmalok.

7

“Seeing this, all of the deities began to praise Me, ‘You truly are
an Ekãntik Bhakta of God; after all, your mind did not forsake God
and become tempted elsewhere.’ On hearing their words, My heart
gained a lot of courage. I then told My man, ‘I know your true form.
So look! If you harbour a thought about any object other than God, I
will crush you to pieces.’ In the same way, I told My buddhi, ‘If you
harbour any form of resolve other than that of God, then you will be
in trouble.’ Similarly, I told My chitt, ‘If you contemplate on
anything other than God, then I will also crush you to pieces.’ In the
same way, I told My ahamkãr, ‘If you harbour any form of conceit
except that of servitude towards God, I will destroy you.’

8

“Following this, just as I had totally forgotten all of the objects of
this realm, I also totally forgot all of the objects of Devlok and
Brahmalok. When all of those thoughts were dispelled, the illness
that had arisen as a result of those thoughts also disappeared. Thus,
one who is a devotee of God should behave in such a manner.” In this
way, Shriji Mahãrãj narrated His own experience for the sake of the
liberation of His devotees, while in reality, He Himself is the
manifest form of Shri Krishna Purushottam Nãrãyan.

The Vachanãmrut

405

9

Shriji Mahãrãj then said, “The Vãsudev Mãhãtmya describes the
dharma of an ekãntik bhakta as follows: ‘An ekãntik bhakta does not
believe his body to be his own true form; he believes himself to be
chaitanya. He does bhakti of God while observing dharma, gnãn and
vairãgya. Also, he maintains no desire for any object other than
God.’ When he becomes such a sãdhu by worshipping God in this
way, then there is no greater status than that of a sãdhu. For
example, in a kingdom, the queen’s authority is equal to that of the
king. In the same way, that sãdhu possesses as much majesty as
God. Therefore, a sãdhu should not wish for the insignificant
pleasures of worldly life. Why? Because when that sãdhu attains
the abode of God, then just as the lords of countless millions of
brahmãnds – Brahmã and other ishwars – bring countless types of
gifts and other articles for God, they also bring them for that sãdhu.
Moreover, by the grace of God, that sãdhu acquires transcendental
powers and strength. Keeping such a lofty thought in one’s mind,
one should not desire anything other than God. For example, a
person who has obtained a chintãmani should look after it with great
care. This is because it will enable him to obtain any object he
desires. Similarly, a devotee of God should hold on to the chintãmani
in the form of God’s form; he should never forsake it. Only then will
he attain everything.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-22 || 155 ||

Gadhadã II-23
Heat and Frost
1

On Jyeshtha sudi 11, Samvat 1878 [31 May 1822], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting in front of the mandir of Shri
Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was
wearing a white khes and had also covered Himself with a white
cotton cloth. He had also tied a white pãgh around His head. At that
time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees from various places
had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Today I pondered over the
nature of the mind. It appears that the mind is not separate from
the jiva; that is, it is a reflection of the jiva itself, but not separate
from it. I also observed that the nature of the mind is like the heat of
summer and the frost of winter. Just as a person can die from heat
The Vachanãmrut

406

or frost, similarly, when the mind travels towards the vishays via the
indriyas, if those vishays are full of miseries, the mind becomes ‘hot’
like the heat of summer; and if those vishays are pleasurable, then
the mind becomes ‘cold’ like the frost of winter. Specifically, when
the mind, having indulged in those vishays which are full of misery
and having become ‘hot’ like the scorching winds of summer heat,
enters a person’s heart, it makes the person extremely miserable and
forces him to fall from the path of liberation. Such a person should
be known to have died from the effects of heat. When the mind,
having indulged in the pleasures of those vishays that are full of
happiness and having become ‘cold’ like frost, enters a person’s heart,
it makes that person complacent, thus causing him to fall from the
path of liberation. He should be known to have died due to frost.
3

“However, one whose mind remains unmoved – that is, it does
not become ‘hot’ upon experiencing repulsive vishays and does not
become ‘cold’ upon experiencing pleasurable vishays – should be
known as a Param-Bhãgwat Sant. But indeed, it is no small feat to
cultivate one’s mind in this manner.

4

“Moreover, the mind is like a child. If a child attempts to grasp
a snake, or touch a flame or perhaps hold an unsheathed sword, it
becomes upset when it is not allowed to do so; and even if it is allowed
to do so, it will hurt itself. Similarly, if the mind is not allowed to
indulge in the vishays, it becomes upset; and if it is allowed to
indulge in them, it turns away from God, and thus becomes
extremely miserable. Therefore, only one whose mind has a craving
for God and which becomes neither ‘hot’ nor ‘cold’ by the vishays
should be known as a sãdhu.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-23 || 156 ||

The Vachanãmrut

407

Gadhadã II-24
Resoluteness in Sãnkhya and in Yoga; Choko-Pãtloi
1

On Shrãvan sudi 8, Samvat 1879 [26 July 1822], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj arrived at Lakshmivãdi on horseback from
Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. There, He sat facing north
upon the platform, dressed entirely in white clothes. He was wearing
a garland of mogrã flowers around His neck, and a tassel of mogrã
flowers was also inserted in His pãgh. At that time, an assembly of
paramhansas as well as devotees from various places had gathered
before Him.

2

Thereupon Muktãnand Swãmi asked Shriji Mahãrãj, “Mahãrãj,
does a devotee who has resolute conviction in God experience any
hindrances, or not?”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “A devotee may be resolute in two ways:
One is by being resolute in yoga, and the other is by being resolute in
sãnkhya. Of these, a devotee who is resolute in yoga keeps his vrutti
constantly fixed on the form of God. A devotee who is resolute in
sãnkhya understands the extent of human pleasures, as well as the
extent of the pleasures of the realised yogis, chãrans, vidyãdhars,
gandharvas, deities, etc. In addition, he appraises the pleasures of
the 14 realms and believes, ‘These pleasures are only so much’;
moreover, he also appraises the miseries that subsequently follow
those pleasures. As a result, he develops vairãgya towards those
misery-filled pleasures, and thereby maintains profound love only for
God. So, such a person who is resolute in sãnkhya possesses the
strength of understanding.

4

“In comparison, the strength of one who is resolute in yoga is
based only on keeping his vrutti constantly on the form of God. If he
were to encounter some disturbances due to adverse circumstances,
then although his vrutti was originally fixed on God’s form, it would
become attached elsewhere as well. This is because one who is
resolute in yoga somewhat lacks the strength of understanding.
i ‘Choko-pãtlo’ refers to the cleaning and mopping of a kitchen floor after a meal

has been eaten. In this context, it refers to the fact that everything except God,
Akshardhãm and the muktas is perishable.

The Vachanãmrut

408

Thus, it is possible that such a devotee may well experience
hindrances.
5

“However, if one is resolute in both sãnkhya and yoga, then
there would be no problems whatsoever. Such a devotee of God is
never enticed by any object other than the form of God. He realises,
‘With the exception of God’s Akshardhãm, the form of God in that
Akshardhãm and His devotees in that Akshardhãm, everything
else – all of the realms, the deities, and the opulence of the deities – is
perishable.’ Realising this, he maintains profound love only for God.
Such a devotee never experiences any sort of hindrances whatsoever.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-24 || 157 ||

Gadhadã II-25
A Renunciant Who Harbours Worldly Desires and
a Householder Who Has No Worldly Desires
1

On Shrãvan vadi 6, Samvat 1879 [8 August 1822], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot on the
veranda outside the south-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in
Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, an
assembly of munis as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him.

2

Addressing all of the paramhansas, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Please
listen, I wish to ask you a question. First, suppose there is a
renunciant devotee of God who is strict in the physical observance of
all religious vows. However, within his heart, he has an intense
desire to indulge in the vishays. Nevertheless, he does not physically
succumb to those desires. Such is the renunciant. Suppose there is
also another devotee who is a householder. Physically, he has close
contact with both women and wealth. However, in his heart, he is
free of worldly desires in all respects. The question, then, is what
will be their fate after death? Will they both attain the same state?
Or will one become superior to the other? Please consider the
distinctions between the two and give an answer for each separately.”

3

Thereupon Gopãlãnand Swãmi replied, “When the renunciant
passes away, because of the intense desires in his heart to indulge in
the vishays, God will make him a wealthy householder either in this
Mrutyulok or in Devlok, where he will attain an abundance of
The Vachanãmrut

409

vishays to indulge in. In fact, in Devlok, he will indulge in vishays
like those of a person who has deviated from his spiritual endeavours
as described in the Bhagwad Gitã.
4

“On the other hand, when the householder devotee passes away,
because he is free of worldly desires, he will attain the abode of God –
Brahmapur – where he will reside at the holy feet of God.

5

“As far as the aforementioned renunciant is concerned, when he
becomes satiated after indulging in the vishays, he will eventually
develop vairãgya towards them; and then, feeling guilty in his mind,
he will engage in the worship of God. Thereafter, he will become free
of worldly desires and attain the abode of God.”

6

Hearing this, Shriji Mahãrãj commented, “Correct. That is the
exact answer to the question.”

7

Then Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “If one has such strong worldly
desires and wishes to eradicate them, by what means can they be
eradicated?”

8

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “Just as Ukã Khãchar has become
addicted to serving the sãdhus, in the same way, if one becomes
addicted to serving God and His Sant to the extent that one would
not be able to stay for even a moment without serving them, then all
of the impure desires in one’s antahkaran will be destroyed.”

9

Then Swayamprakãshãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, by which
means is God extremely pleased?”

10

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “If a devotee who once had only 20 kg of
grains in his house were to attain the sovereignty of a village, or the
sovereignty of five villages, or the sovereignty of 50 villages, or the
sovereignty of 100 villages, or even the sovereignty of the entire
earth; and if, after this, he remains just as loving and humble with
the Sant as he previously was when he was poor and submissive; and
if he remains just as humble even if he were to attain the kingdom of
Indralok and Brahmalok, then God would be extremely pleased upon
him.

11

“As for a renunciant, even after attaining powers similar to
those possessed by God, if he can continue to menially serve all
sãdhus in exactly the same manner as he did when he was new and
timid and not attempt to impose his authority upon other sãdhus or
try to compete with them, then God would be extremely pleased upon
him.”
The Vachanãmrut

410

|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-25 || 158 ||

Gadhadã II-26
Suppressing Ãtmã-realisation and
Other Virtues if They Obstruct Bhakti
1

On the night of Bhãdarvã sudi 11, Samvat 1879 [29 August
1822], Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting in front of the mandir of Shri
Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was
dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, an assembly of
paramhansas as well as devotees from various places had gathered
before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “A devotee of God should never
do anything that displeases God and His Bhakta, and he should also
abandon all those who hinder him in worshipping God, even if they
are his own relatives. Also, just as one forsakes an enemy, one
should forsake any swabhãv that does not please God. Furthermore,
one should never support those who are non-believers, just as
Bharatji did not support his own mother. Also, a devotee of God
should perceive flaws primarily in himself. Conversely, a person who
perceives flaws in others and only virtues in himself may be known
as a satsangi, but he should be known to be half-fallen.

3

“Furthermore, for a devotee of God, if gnãn of the ãtmã, vairãgya
or dharma are a hindrance in his bhakti towards God, then he should
suppress even them and thereby maintain the predominance of
bhakti only. If, however, they are supportive in offering bhakti, then
they are fine. Only one who has such an understanding can be called
a full-fledged devotee of God.

4

“Moreover, no matter how great he may be, if a person perceives
flaws in others and virtues in himself, he will certainly encounter
hindrances on the path of liberation. For example, Rãdhikãji was
great and she also had intense love for God; but when she perceived
virtues in herself and flaws in Shri Krishna Bhagwãn, a trace of
tamogun entered into her love for him. Thereafter, she quarrelled
with Shri Krishna Bhagwãn and Shridãmã, and thus Shridãmã
cursed her. As a result, Rãdhikãji fell from Golok, took birth in the
home of a carpenter and had to marry a man other than God; thus,
she suffered a severe disgrace. Even Shridãmã perceived virtues in
The Vachanãmrut

411

himself and attributed faults to Rãdhikãji. As a result, he was
cursed by Rãdhikã and had to become a demon.
5

“This, however, is not the way of falling from the abode of God,
for those who have fallen have done so due to God’s will. After all,
God has declared, ‘Even one who is as great as Rãdhikãji will fall if
one perceives virtues in oneself and perceives flaws in devotees of
God. If that is so, what can be said of others?’ Hence, a devotee of
God should see only virtues in all satsangis and should find only
flaws in himself. If a person has such an understanding, then even if
he is not very intelligent, his satsang still becomes stronger day by
day. Without it, though, even if he is very intelligent, he will fall
back from the Satsang fellowship and in the end will certainly
become a non-believer.

6

“Moreover, the following practice is observed everywhere: When
a king or a guru scolds and rebukes a servant or a disciple, if the
servant or disciple accepts it positively, then the king or the guru
harbours tremendous affection for him. Conversely, they do not feel
affection towards a person who reacts negatively when given such
advice. God’s method is similar. When He gives advice to someone,
if they accept it positively, He develops affection for them; if they
react negatively, however, He does not develop affection for them.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-26 || 159 ||

Gadhadã II-27
The Great Are Pleased When
No Impure Desires Remain
1

On Kãrtik sudi 11, Samvat 1879 [25 November 1822], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on the veranda outside the
south-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was
dressed entirely in white clothes. A garland of white and yellow
guldãvadi flowers adorned His neck, and tassels hung from both
sides of His pãgh. At that time, an assembly of paramhansas as well
as devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj asked Muktãnand Swãmi, “What
causes anger to arise within you? Also, how much of that cause does
it take for you to become angry? As for Me, even if someone
squanders anything from one to one hundred thousand rupees, I
The Vachanãmrut

412

would not become angry for My own sake.
Yet if someone
transgresses his own dharma, or if an arrogant person abuses a
meek person, or if someone sides with injustice, then for the sake of
another person, I do become angry for a brief moment; but never do I
do so for My own sake. Even when I do express anger for another’s
sake, it does not last for even a second, nor is any grudge formed. So,
My question to you is what causes anger to arise within you and how
is it dispelled?”
3

To this Muktãnand Swãmi replied, “Anger arises due to
association with some objects or on seeing perversity in a person; but
it subsides instantly.”

4

Then Shriji Mahãrãj asked, “By what thought process do you
manage to do that?”

5

Muktãnand Swãmi replied, “First, by contemplating upon God’s
greatness, I realise, ‘I do not wish to retain any swabhãvs that would
displease God.’ Secondly, after examining the path of sãdhus such as
Shukji and Jadbharat, I think, ‘Such an inappropriate swabhãv does
not suit a sãdhu.’”

6

Then Shriji Mahãrãj commented, “Such a thought that is
capable of repelling the force of lust, anger, etc., transcends the
gunas, and it is firm in your jiva. In fact, such thoughts that repel
the influence of lust, anger, etc., are due to the sanskãrs of past lives.
Moreover, regarding your nature, I know this much: Initially, you
may become attached to any worldly object that you come across, but
ultimately, you do not remain attached to it; you are capable of
breaking that bondage.”

7

Thereafter, Muktãnand Swãmi questioned, “Why does the
deficiency of becoming influenced in the first place still remain?”

8

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “Each of the eight factors of place, time,
company, etc.1, has a force equal to that of the past sanskãrs. Thus,
when one encounters them, they overpower the force of the past
sanskãrs. After all, if good deeds and bad deeds are performed only
by the influence of one’s sanskãrs then all of the distinctions of moral
do’s and don’ts; i.e., ‘This should be done and this should not be done,’
as prescribed in the Vedas, the Shãstras and the Purãns, would
become meaningless. But these scriptures, which have been written
by the great, can never become false.

The Vachanãmrut

413

9

“Just see, Jay and Vijay behaved improperly and thus fell from
the abode of God, where there is no influence of kãl, karma or mãyã.
On the other hand, Prahlãd pleased Nãradji and thus, even though
circumstances were adverse, they were unable to hinder him.
Conversely, even though circumstances were favourable in JayVijay’s case, because the Sanakãdik were angered, Jay-Vijay fell from
the abode of God. Therefore, one who wishes to attain liberation
should do whatever pleases the great Purush. Such a Purush
becomes pleased when there are no traces of impure desires left
within one’s heart.

10

“One should keep in mind, though, that one who harbours anger
and other such vices towards the meek will also develop such feelings
towards the great, and thereafter also towards one’s Ishtadev. Thus,
a person wishing to attain liberation should not harbour any vicious
feelings towards anyone; if he does, then he is sure to develop such illfeelings towards devotees of God, and then eventually towards God as
well.

11

“That is why if I have upset even one meek person I think, ‘God
resides as antaryãmi in all. While staying in one place, He knows
what is in everyone’s heart. So, since He must also be present in the
heart of the person whom I have upset, I have offended God as well.’
Realising this, I bow down to him, give him whatever he wishes and
do whatever is necessary to please him.”

12

Having said this, Shriji Mahãrãj continued, “I have thought and
realised that if one maintains too much renunciation or too much
compassion, then one cannot offer bhakti towards God, thus causing
a breach of upãsanã. For example, from the past, we notice that
upãsanã eventually perished in those who were extreme renunciants.
Therefore, having thought about this, and for the sake of preserving
upãsanã, I have relaxed the emphasis on renunciation and have built
mandirs of God. Thereby, even if only a little renunciation remains,
upãsanã will at least be preserved, and through it, many jivas will
attain liberation.

13

“On the other hand, how is it possible for a person who wishes to
offer bhakti to God to retain compassion like that of Jain sãdhus?
After all, a devotee is required to pick flowers and tulsi for God; he is
required to bring various types of vegetables and to cultivate gardens
for God; he must also build mandirs. Therefore, one who sits idly,
maintaining extreme renunciation and compassion, is unable to offer
The Vachanãmrut

414

bhakti to God. When bhakti diminishes, the upãsanã of God is also
destroyed, and a lineage of blind followers results. That is why I
have had mandirs built – for the purpose of preserving God’s upãsanã
forever.
14

“Moreover, a devotee never deviates from one’s dharma. Hence,
to perform the bhakti and upãsanã of God while maintaining one’s
dharma is My principle.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-27 || 160 ||

Gadhadã II-28
Mahãrãj’s Compassionate Nature; A ‘Lifeline’
1

On Fãgun sudi 2, Samvat 1879 [13 February 1823], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting facing west on a square platform
at His residence in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was
wearing a white khes and had covered Himself with a white cotton
cloth. He had also tied a white pãgh around His head. At that time,
an assembly of munis as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Prãgji Dave commented, “There is no scripture like
the Shrimad Bhãgwat.”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Yes, the Shrimad Bhãgwat is certainly
good, but there is no scripture like the Vãsudev Mãhãtmya, a portion
of the Skand Purãn. After all, in that scripture great emphasis has
been placed on dharma, gnãn, vairãgya and bhakti, as well as nonviolence.”

4

Having said this, Shriji Mahãrãj continued, “The Vãlmiki
Rãmãyan and Harivansh have placed great emphasis on violence. In
fact, even Raghunãthji has behaved according to the characteristics
of a Kshatriya. Even though Raghunãthji protected anyone who
sought refuge at his feet, he would, however, immediately abandon
them if they committed even the slightest mistake. For example,
even though Sitãji became subject to only minor public criticism, he
instantly renounced her, even though she was very dear to him.”

5

Hearing this, Muktãnand Swãmi commented, “Rãmãnand
Swãmi’s nature was similar.”

The Vachanãmrut

415

6

Then Shriji Mahãrãj revealed, “My nature is not like that. I
have great compassion for devotees of God. Of the Pãndavs, Arjun
was also of a very compassionate nature. Amongst all men there has
been no man like Rãmchandraji and Arjun, and amongst all women
there has been no woman like Sitãji and Draupadi.

7

“Now I shall describe My own nature. Even though I have a
compassionate nature, if a person spites devotees of God, then I
develop an aversion towards that person. If I hear someone speaking
ill of devotees, then I would not feel like speaking to him, even if I
had to. On the other hand, I become extremely pleased with one who
menially serves the devotees of God. In fact, My nature is such that I
do not become easily pleased or displeased over small matters. Only
after I have observed for many days whether a person is worthy of
My pleasure or displeasure do I become pleased or displeased. Never
do I become pleased or displeased with a person merely upon hearing
someone else’s opinions of that person; I appreciate only those virtues
that I perceive with My own mind. Also, My inclination is as follows:
‘If one is a genuine devotee of God, then I am a devotee of that
devotee, and I do the bhakti of such devotees of God.’ This is My
greatest virtue. A person who does not have that virtue is not worthy
of any type of greatness.

8

“Conversely, those who have perceived flaws in devotees of God,
even though they were very great, have fallen from their status of
eminence. Those who progress do so only by serving devotees of God,
and those who regress do so only by spiting devotees of God. In fact,
the only method for a person to please God is to serve devotees of God
by thought, word and deed. The only method to displease God is to
spite devotees of God.

9

“Hence, My principle is that if God is pleased with Me, and I
have the company of the devotees of God, then even if I were to stay
far away from God for countless years, I would not feel any grief
mentally. On the other hand, if God is not pleased with Me, then
even if I were to stay near God, I would not consider that to be good.
Moreover, the essence of all the scriptures is also that one should only
do that which pleases God. In fact, one who does not do that which
pleases God should be known to have fallen from the path of God.

10

“If a person has the company of the devotees of God and also has
earned God’s pleasure, then even though he is in Mrutyulok, he is
still in the abode of God. Why? Because one who serves the Sant
The Vachanãmrut

416

and earns God’s favour will certainly stay near God. Conversely,
even if a devotee is in the abode of God, if he has not earned God’s
favour and is jealous of devotees of God, then that devotee will
certainly fall from that abode.
11

“Hence, in order to please God, I desire only to serve devotees of
God in this life and all subsequent lives. Furthermore, just as this is
My resolution, all of you should also make the same resolution.”

12

Thereupon Muktãnand Swãmi and all of the other devotees
folded their hands in prayer and said, “Mahãrãj, we also wish to keep
such a resolution.” Having said this, all of the devotees pledged and
bowed at Shriji Mahãrãj’s feet.

13

Finally, Shriji Mahãrãj added, “What is this discourse which I
have delivered before you like? Well, I have delivered it having heard
and having extracted the essence from the Vedas, the Shãstras, the
Purãns and all other words on this earth pertaining to liberation.
This is the most profound and fundamental principle; it is the
essence of all essences. For all those who have previously attained
liberation, for all those who will attain it in the future and for all
those who are presently treading the path of liberation, this discourse
is like a lifeline.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-28 || 161 ||

Gadhadã II-29
The Characteristics of
One Who Is Attached to God
1

On Fãgun sudi 8, Samvat 1879 [18 February 1823], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot on the
veranda outside the north-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in
Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, an
assembly of munis as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “A devotee whose mind has
become deeply attached to the form of Shri Krishna Bhagwãn has the
following characteristics: Firstly, even though he may be extremely
exhausted after prolonged walking and does not have enough
strength left in his body even to sit upright, if an opportunity to talk
about God arises, then he becomes attentive and most willing to
The Vachanãmrut

417

narrate and hear such talks – as if he has not walked even a single
mile. Also, regardless of any diseases or ailments that may be a
source of pain for him and regardless of being insulted, if he hears
talks about God, then he would instantly be relieved of all his
miseries. Furthermore, he may appear to be totally engrossed in the
wealth and property he has attained, but the moment he hears talks
of God, it would seem as if he has no association with anything.
Such would be his eagerness to listen to talks about God. One who
has such characteristics should be known to have developed deep
attachment to God.”
3

Then Muktãnand Swãmi asked,
attachment towards God develop?”

“How

does

such

deep

4

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “Either due to very strong sanskãrs from
past lives, or by serving and thus pleasing the Sant who has such
firm attachment with God – these two methods help create deep
attachment towards God. Besides these, there are no other methods.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-29 || 162 ||

Gadhadã II-30
Not Becoming Bound by Women and Gold
1

On the second Chaitra sudi 9, Samvat 1879 [19 April 1823],
Swãmi Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a cushion with a
cylindrical pillow on the veranda outside the mandir of Shri
Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was
wearing a white khes and had covered Himself with a white cotton
cloth. He had also tied a black-bordered cloth around His head. In
addition to this, He was wearing a garland of white flowers, and a
tassel of white flowers was dangling from His pãgh. At that time, an
assembly of sãdhus as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “The Shrimad Bhãgwat and the
other sacred scriptures are truthful, and so reality reflects what is
stated in those scriptures. Just see, in the Shrimad Bhãgwat, Kalii
is said to reside in gold, and for that reason I do not like even the
i Here ‘Kali’ refers to Kali-yug.

The Vachanãmrut

418

sight of gold. Moreover, just as gold is a source of attachment, so is
beauty. After all, when a beautiful woman enters an assembly, even
the most composed cannot remain without being drawn towards her
beauty.
Hence, gold and women are the source of extreme
attachment.
3

“One does not become attached to these two when one realises
the pure chaitanya Brahma – which transcends Prakruti-Purush –
as the only satya; and when one realises that Brahma to be one’s own
self; and when one becomes brahmarup and worships Shri Krishna
Bhagwãn, who is Parabrahma; and when one realises Prakruti and
all of the entities which have evolved from it – all of which are below
that Brahma – as being asatya, perishable and worthless; and when
one views all mãyik names and formsi as flawed and develops intense
vairãgya towards all those names and forms. Only under these
conditions do gold and women not bind a person; otherwise, they most
certainly do cause bondage.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-30 || 163 ||

Gadhadã II-31
Associating with Brahma through Contemplation
1

On Shrãvan sudi 4, Samvat 1880 [10 August 1823], Shriji
Mahãrãj was sitting upon a cushion with a cylindrical pillow that
had been placed on a square platform at His residence in Dãdã
Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white
clothes. He had also tied a black-bordered cloth around His head. At
that time, while He was having the Kapil Gitã – a section of the
Shrimad Bhãgwat – read by Prãgji Dave, paramhansas as well as
devotees from various places had gathered before Him in an
assembly.

2

Following the reading, Shriji Mahãrãj said to the paramhansas,
“Vãsudev Bhagwãn – who is Purushottam, the cause of all causes
and who transcends Akshar – implants virility in mahãmãyã
through Mahã-Purush. That Purush is like Akshar, he is a mukta

i Here ‘mãyik names and form’ refers to anything that has a name and a form –

everything that has arisen from mãyã.

The Vachanãmrut

419

and he is also known as Brahmai . When that Purush implants
virility in mãyã, Virãt-Purush is born from mãyã via PradhãnPurush. Thus, that Virãt-Purush is said to be the son of its
respective Purush. Just as a Brãhmin, a Kshatriya, a Vaishya or
another man of this world begets a son from his wife, similarly,
Virãt-Purush is also begotten.
3

“That Virãt-Purush is just like this jiva, and his actions are also
similar to the jiva. The lifespan of that Virãt-Purush is two
parãrdhs. The creation, sustenance and dissolution of this cosmos
are his three states, just as waking, dream and deep sleep are the
three states of the jiva. Virãt, sutrãtmã and avyãkrut are the three
bodies of that Virãt-Purush. These bodies, which are encircled by the
eight barriers5, have been produced from the 24 elements2 comprising
of mahattattva, etc.

4

“The indriyas, antahkaran and their presiding deities entered
that Virãt and attempted to awaken him. Despite Virãt’s jiva being
inside his body, Virãt still did not rise. Only when Vãsudev
Bhagwãn – the kshetragna – entered within him in the form of
Purush did the body of Virãt rise. Only then did Virãt-Purush
become capable of performing all his activities.

5

“To inspire the jiva, that same God – while transcending mãyã
in the form of deep sleep – resides in the jiva as its witness. The jiva,
however, has been associated with the body, the indriyas and the
vishays. As a result of this improper association, the jiva has become
one with the body, indriyas, etc. After forsaking their association,
the jiva realises, ‘My self is Brahma, which is transcendental and
free from mãyã.’ If one associates with Brahma through continuous
contemplation in this manner, the jiva acquires the virtues of that
Brahma. However, it is a great fault of the jiva that even after
hearing this fact, it cannot maintain constant remembrance.

6

“In this way, the inspirer of both the ishwar known as VirãtPurush and of this jiva is Purushottam – also known as Vãsudev – in
the form of Purush. Like the jiva, that Virãt-Purush is also bound,
remaining bound until he completes his lifespan of two parãrdhs.
When he dies, he gets direct contact with that Purush. This is
because his father, Purush, is powerful and cares for him
i Here ‘Brahma’ should be understood to mean ‘akshar-mukta’.

The Vachanãmrut

420

appropriately. So, because Virãt-Purush is attached to mãyã, he is
again produced from mãyã at the end of dissolution.
7

“Moreover, just as the jiva is bound and powerless, in the same
way, its father is also bound and powerless. How, then, can the
father help his son? Thus the jiva remains continuously attached to
mãyã in the form of unconsciousness; that attachment, however, is
never broken. Only when one constantly associates with one’s
inspirer, Brahma, through contemplation – as previously described –
is that attachment broken.

8

“Also, Virãt-Purush worships Sankarshan, Aniruddha and
Pradyumna. Specifically, during the state of dissolution, he worships
Sankarshan; during the state of sustenance, he worships
Pradyumna; and during the state of creation, he worships
Aniruddha.
In fact, the trio of Sankarshan, Aniruddha and
Pradyumna are the sagun forms of Vãsudev Bhagwãn, and it is on
the strength of his worship of them that Virãt-Purush becomes
capable of performing the activities of creation, sustenance and
dissolution. Moreover, as long as he worships these three, his
association with mãyã – in the form of creation, sustenance and
dissolution – is not broken. It is when he worships Vãsudev
Bhagwãn, who is nirgun, that Virãt-Purush forsakes mãyã and
becomes brahmarup. Similarly, when the jiva worships God in the
form of Brahmã and other deities, it attains fruits in the form of
dharma, arth and kãm. But, when it worships the avatãrs of God –
Rãm, Krishna and others – it becomes brahmarup and attains
liberation. The same applies for Virãt-Purush.

9

“Now, it is said in the scriptures that the avatãrs manifest from
that Virãt-Purush. This should be understood as follows: When
Vãsudevnãrãyan – through the form of Purush – comes and resides
in Virãt-Purush, he is said to be an avatãr. Thus all those avatãrs
are Vãsudev Bhagwãn’s only.
When that Vãsudev Bhagwãn
withdraws Himself and separates from Virãt-Purush, then it is not
possible for an avatãr to manifest through Virãt-Purush alone.
Thus, the descriptions of avatãrs manifesting through him are only
because of the presence of Vãsudev in him. In fact, when Vãsudev –
the kshetragna – had not yet entered him, that Virãt-Purush was not
even capable of performing any of his own activities.

10

“When the previously-mentioned Purush impregnates mãyã, a
son in the form of Virãt-Purush is produced via Pradhãn-Purush.
The Vachanãmrut

421

From that same mãyã, many brahmãnds – in the form of VirãtPurushes – are produced via countless Pradhãn-Purush pairs.
Furthermore, that Purush is desireless, he is a mukta, he is
brahmarup and he is the cause of mãyã. Although he stays within
mãyã, he still remains unaffected by mãyã. Also, he has no desire to
enjoy mãyã since he is content due to the bliss of Brahma; thus, he is
fulfilled.
11

“The ishwar known as Virãt-Purush indulges in the pleasures of
mãyã and then, at the time of dissolution, forsakes mãyã. The jiva,
on the other hand, indulges in the pleasures of mãyã and then
merges into mãyã, remaining miserable.”

12

Shuk Muni then asked, “Purushottam Vãsudev, in the form of
Purush, is the cause of the creation, sustenance and dissolution of
countless brahmãnds.
Consequently, the scriptures generally
describe Purushottam as Purush. But what is the extent of the
distinction between Purush and Vãsudev?”

13

Shriji Mahãrãj then explained, “Just as there is a difference
between the jiva and Virãt-Purush, who is an ishwar; and just as
there is also a difference between ishwar and Purush, similarly,
there is an immense difference between Purush and Vãsudev
Bhagwãn – Purushottam. Purushottam Vãsudev Bhagwãn is the
master of all, whereas there are many such brahmarup, Akshar-like
Purushes who worship the holy feet of Vãsudev and who offer praise
to Him. In this way, Purushottam, Purush, ishwar, jiva and mãyã
are the five eternal entities.

14

“I have explained this fact in this way many times, but it is not
firmly fixed in one’s heart due to a lack of deep contemplation. As a
result, after listening to the words of the scriptures, no stability
remains in one’s understanding. If, however, it has been absolutely
fixed, then one’s understanding would never falter on listening to
such words. Therefore, this fact should be thoroughly contemplated
upon and written down.” In this way, the discourse delivered by
Shriji Mahãrãj has been written.
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-31 || 164 ||

The Vachanãmrut

422

Gadhadã II-32
A Cactus Plant; Unhindered Bhakti
1

On Shrãvan sudi 5, Samvat 1880 [11 August 1823], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting in His residence in Dãdã
Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white
clothes. He had also tied a black-bordered cloth around His head. In
addition to this, garlands of flowers adorned His neck, bunches of
flowers were placed upon His ears and tassels of flowers were placed
upon His head. At that time, an assembly of paramhansas as well as
devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Then addressing all of the devotees, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “In
worldly life, the affection one has for family members is like that of a
cactus plant or the branch of a banyan or pipal tree. That is, if they
are cut and transplanted elsewhere, they would once again grow into
trees. In comparison, once a mango tree or a neem tree is cut, it does
not take root again. The affection that one has for those other than
the members of one’s family is like that of the mango tree or the
neem tree. Again, the affection one has for the members of one’s
family is like the cactus plant and banyan tree in that if they have
been cut down, they unfailingly do grow again, even while lying in
the soil.

3

“For this reason, the affection that a person harbours for his
family is only uprooted when he realises his true form to be the
jivãtmã, distinct from the three bodies of sthul, sukshma and kãran;
when, discarding all vanity of gender, caste and ashram, he beholds
God’s form within it; and when he becomes eager to engage only in
the worship of God. Only then will the affection that he harbours for
his family be completely cut. Besides this, though, there are no other
means to do so.”

4

Then Shriji Mahãrãj continued, “The sole cause behind the jiva
attaining
liberation,
transcending
mãyã
and
becoming
brahmaswarup is its engagement in the gnãn, meditation, devotional
songs, spiritual discourses, etc., of the manifest form of Vãsudev
Bhagwãn, who is Purushottam. It is due to these that the jiva
transgresses mãyã, attains an extremely elevated state, and also
attains God’s Akshardhãm. In this, ãtmã-realisation, vairãgya and
dharma are merely helpful auxiliaries in offering bhakti to God.
Without the bhakti of God, though, vairãgya, ãtmã-realisation and
The Vachanãmrut

423

dharma alone are not capable of allowing the jiva to transcend mãyã.
In fact, even if one does not possess intense dharma, ãtmã-realisation
or vairãgya, if one possesses only bhakti towards God, then one would
still attain liberation and transcend mãyã. Such is the superiority of
bhakti over dharma, ãtmã-realisation, and vairãgya.
5

“Nevertheless, only with the help of dharma and the other
attributes is unhindered bhakti possible.
Without those other
attributes, though, there will definitely be difficulties in offering
bhakti during times of adverse circumstances. That is why one
should offer bhakti coupled with dharma, ãtmã-realisation and
vairãgya.

6

“Having said this, though, even if a devotee who offers such
bhakti happens to be confronted by adverse places, times, actions and
company, then although he is a devotee of God, his heart would
indeed become disturbed, and he would become whimsical.
Therefore, one should forsake such adverse places, adverse times,
adverse actions and adverse company, and forever associate with
favourable places, favourable times, favourable actions and
favourable company; but never should one associate with adverse
circumstances.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-32 || 165 ||

Gadhadã II-33
The Vow of Non-Lust
1

On Shrãvan vadi 13, Samvat 1880 [18 September 1823], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a cushion with a
cylindrical pillow that had been placed on a large, decorated cot in
Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in
white clothes. At that time, an assembly of munis as well as
devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Then, addressing all of the sãdhus and devotees, Shriji Mahãrãj
said, “First, I shall talk about My inclination. Thereafter, all of you
can describe your personal thoughts as to how you feel liberation can
be attained, and you can also explain how you think you should
behave in order for God to be pleased with you in this realm and
beyond.”

The Vachanãmrut

424

3

Having said this, Shriji Mahãrãj began to describe His own
inclination, saying, “If it appears to Me that I have a liking for
something, I would only be happy after I have discarded it. Should I
recall in My mind any object or any person other than devotees of
God, then I would feel comfortable only after I have totally distanced
Myself from that object or person. Also, in My heart, in no way do I
ever experience an aversion towards a devotee of God. Even though I
am insistingly offered the panchvishays without actually wishing for
them Myself, I still do not have any desire for them. In fact, I push
them away. In fact, I swear by the lives of these paramhansas that
from the day I was born to this very day, I have never harboured an
improper thought regarding women or wealth, either in the waking
state or in the dream state. Thus, I am eternally flawless. One who
perceives any flaws in Me will himself suffer from vicious thoughts
both in the waking and dream states. Moreover, he will suffer
greatly at the time of his death as well.

4

“In addition, only the contemplation of God remains within My
heart, and although I outwardly meet and mingle with devotees of
God, it is solely for the benefit of their jivas. Indeed, the day when I
feel that I have developed affection for something other than the
devotees of God, I will consider Myself as having been dislodged from
My spiritual status. However, I am confident that that would never
happen. Thus, I have described My inclination to you. Now, all of
you can describe your own personal inclinations.”

5

Hearing this, all of the sãdhus and devotees each described their
inclinations, i.e., their beliefs as to how God would be pleased upon
them if they were to abide by that inclination in this realm and
beyond. Of them, some described how they possess vairãgya of
everything except God; others mentioned their virtue of ãtmãrealisation; some spoke of their love for God; some mentioned their
observance of dharma. In this manner, many different inclinations
were mentioned. However, no one mentioned the inclination that
Shriji Mahãrãj had in mind.

6

So, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “If a person firmly observes the vow of
non-lust, then he is never far from God – whether he is in this realm
or beyond.
Moreover, My affection for such a person never
diminishes. In fact, the very reason that I have stayed here is
because of these devotees’ firm resolve to observe the vow of non-lust.
If a person strictly observes that vow, then even if I were a thousand
The Vachanãmrut

425

miles away from him, I would still be close to him. Conversely, if a
person is slack in his observance of the vow of non-lust, then even if
he is beside Me, he is as good as a hundred thousand miles away. In
fact, I do not like to be served by such a person. It is only because
this Mulji Brahmachãri is extremely staunch in his observance of the
vow of non-lust that I very much like his service. If, however,
someone else serves Me, I am not as pleased.
7

“Furthermore, in all of the discourses that I deliver, I always
strongly propagate observance of the vow of non-lust. Indeed, I have
been solidly reinforcing it since the day I was born.

8

“When an assembly has gathered, if a man or woman looks
lustfully at someone else, then no matter how hard they may try to
conceal it, it never escapes My attention. At that time, I become
extremely displeased upon that person, and even My face turns red.
It hurts Me deeply, but feeling obliged, I cannot say much.
Furthermore, being a sãdhu, I keep My feelings within My heart, but
if I were to adopt the ways of a king, I would punish that person
severely.

9

“That is why I have already instructed all of the senior
paramhansas and senior women that if any male or female devotee in
the Satsang fellowship commits a breach in his or her observance of
the vow of non-lust, then please do not inform Me of it. Because
when I hear such things, I am deeply saddened – just as a childless
couple would feel saddened if their newly born son were to suddenly
die. In fact, at such times, I feel like abandoning this Satsang and
leaving. Therefore, only those who observe this vow are dear to Me;
they and I will always by very close, both in this realm and beyond.”

10

Thereupon Harji Thakkar asked, “By what means can one’s
observance of the vow of non-lust become extremely firm?”

11

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “There is a way, and it comprises of
three components. Just as many components make up a bullock
cart – the driver, the pair of bullocks, the wheels, the yoke, the
supporting assembly, the wooden frame, etc. – similarly, many
components are required to be able to firmly observe the vow of nonlust.
Of these, though, there are three that are absolutely
fundamental.

12

“One is to conquer the mind by constantly contemplating in
one’s mind, ‘I am the ãtmã, not the body.’ Also, the mind should be
The Vachanãmrut

426

continuously kept engaged in the nine types of bhakti, i.e., listening
to spiritual discourses related to God, etc. It should not be left
unoccupied for even a moment. For example, if a man conquers a
ghost but does not assign it some work to do, the ghost would turn
onto the man himself. In this sense, the mind is just like a ghost;
when it is not engaged in the bhakti of God, it begins to conceive evil
thoughts. This can be likened to the ghost getting ready to devour
the man. For this reason, then, the mind should continuously be
kept occupied in spiritual discourses, devotional songs, etc., related to
God. This can be known as having conquered the mind.
13

“The second component is to keep the prãns under control. Shri
Krishna Bhagwãn has said in the Bhagwad Gitã, ‘One’s diet and
activity should be kept regulated; that is, one should not keep a
strong yearning for food.’ One who behaves in this manner is said to
have kept his prãns under control. If this is not done, one will feel an
intense yearning for food in one’s mind. Consequently, one’s tongue
will hanker after the countless types of tastes. As result, any other
indriyas that one may have conquered will also become
unconstrained.
Therefore, one should control one’s prãns by
controlling one’s diet.

14

“The third component requires one to control one’s body by
physically keeping it within the niyams prescribed in Satsang for
each individual.

15

“Thus, by strictly observing these three components in this
manner, one’s observance of the vow of non-lust becomes extremely
firm. But one should not consider this to be very difficult to practise.
Because it is not at all difficult for one who is, after all, a sãdhu. The
enemies of lust, anger, avarice, etc., prevail strongly even in a sãdhu,
but to please God, he would still forsake them; for only then can he be
called a true sãdhu.

16

“After all, what is impossible to achieve with this human body?
That which is practised regularly can definitely be achieved. For
example, due to the daily drawing of water from a well, the constant
rubbing of even a soft rope can cause a groove in the very hard piece
of rock that lies on the edge of that well. Similarly, for one who is a
sãdhu and who continuously persists in his efforts for eradicating his
swabhãvs, how long can those swabhãvs remain? They most
certainly will be destroyed. Therefore, one who wishes to observe the
The Vachanãmrut

427

vow of non-lust should intensely employ the method that comprises of
the three components I have just described.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-33 || 166 ||

Gadhadã II-34
Are the Elements Jad or Chaitanya?
1

On Bhãdarvã sudi 1, Samvat 1880 [5 September 1823], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on the veranda outside the
east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was
wearing a white dhotiyu and had covered Himself with a white
cotton cloth. He had also tied a black-bordered cloth around His
head.
At that time, some paramhansas were singing to the
accompaniment of a dukad and sarodã, while other paramhansas as
well as devotees from various places had gathered before Him in an
assembly.

2

Shriji Mahãrãj then said, “Please stop the devotional songs, and
let us conduct a question-answer session in order to dispel
drowsiness.”

3

Having said that, Shriji Mahãrãj continued, “First of all, allow
Me to ask a question: The 24 elements2 such as the indriyas,
antahkaran, etc. – which are the result of mãyã – reside in the jiva.
Now, are those elements jad, or are they chaitanya?”

4

The paramhansas replied, “Those elements are definitely
chaitanya.”

5

Hearing the reply, Shriji Mahãrãj countered, “If those elements
are chaitanya, then along with the jiva residing in this body, there
should be 24 jivas for the 24 elements. Thus, when the jiva attains
liberation, it would be distributed among all of them; moreover, all
sins that are committed by the jiva would also be distributed among
all of them. Therefore, the experiencer of pleasure and pain cannot
be said to be just one jiva. Furthermore, the three types of karmas –
sanchit karmas, prãrabdha karmas and kriyamãn karmas – cannot
be said to apply to just one jiva. Furthermore, in the past, when
Nãrad and the others became liberated, only their own jiva became
liberated, but there is no mention of the jivas of the 24 elements
becoming liberated as well.”
The Vachanãmrut

428

6

By using such logic, Shriji Mahãrãj proved the elements to be
without a jiva. He then logically disproved each answer given by the
paramhansas. As a result, the paramhansas were unable to answer
the question in any way at all.

7

Shriji Mahãrãj then said, “Here, allow Me to answer the
question. Due to the difference between an effect and its cause, there
are two types of elements. The elements that are in the form of the
cause are chaitanya, and the elements that are in the form of the
effect are jad. Now, in actuality, the jiva resides in the heart; but
through its power of consciousness, it behaves with oneness with the
body, indriyas and antahkaran. As a result, the body, indriyas, etc.,
appear to be chaitanya, but in reality they are jad.

8

“When that jiva becomes a devotee of God and attains the abode
of God, the elements which are jad are left behind. Now, as those 24
elements are produced from mãyã, they are forms of mãyã and are
jad; they appear differently in the form of the body, indriyas and
antahkaran. For example, there is one pruthvi that assumes the five
forms of the skin, flesh, marrow, bones and muscles. Due to the
ingenuity of the maker, it also comes in the form of glass. In the
same way, that mãyã, due to the will of God, appears in different
forms – the body, the indriyas, etc.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-34 || 167 ||

Gadhadã II-35
The Underground Store of Grains
1

Approximately an hour-and-a-half before sunrise on Bhãdarvã
sudi 11, Samvat 1880 [16 September 1823], Shriji Mahãrãj awoke
from sleep and sat on a large, decorated cot that had been placed over
the underground store of grains in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in
Gadhadã. He was wearing a white khes and had covered Himself
with a white blanket. He had also tied a black-bordered cloth around
His head.

2

At that time, Shriji Mahãrãj summoned all of the paramhansas
and devotees. Then, addressing them, He began, “I slept very
soundly last night, and though I tried very hard to awake, I could
not. During that sleep, I thought a great deal. It is based upon these

The Vachanãmrut

429

thoughts that I have taken a resolution, about which I shall now tell
you.”
3

He then said, “Even before I met Rãmãnand Swãmi, I could see
My ãtmã as if it were before My eyes, and I also see it now. That
ãtmã is luminous with light like that of the sun. Even amidst the
activities of all My indriyas, I do not lose awareness of that ãtmã for
even a moment.

4

“In actual fact, such ãtmã-realisation is very difficult to attain.
Only a fortunate person who has sanskãrs of many past lives is able
to attain such realisation, whereas if someone else were to
contemplate upon the ãtmã for even a hundred years, he would still
not attain realisation.

5

“So how can one attain ãtmã-realisation? Well, when one
meditates on the form of Shri Krishna Bhagwãn, it is not at all
difficult to attain realisation. Conversely, no one should even hope of
realising or seeing the ãtmã by merely contemplating upon it without
meditating on God. However, by the upãsanã of God, narrating His
divine incidents, chanting His holy name, and observing one’s
dharma, it is not at all difficult for the jiva to attain liberation; it is
an easy path – like crossing the ocean by sitting in a boat. In
contrast, to attain liberation through ãtmã-realisation is a difficult
path – like tying gourds to oneself and trying to cross the ocean.

6

“The only reason why I deliver such talks about knowledge of the
ãtmã is that if one can realise one’s ãtmã to be distinct from the
body, then one will no longer harbour any love for one’s body or for
one’s relatives. Then, there would no longer be any hindrances in the
bhakti of God. This is the only reason; but one should not think that
it is possible to attain liberation by the knowledge of the ãtmã alone.

7

“Also, there are sayings in the world such as, ‘‹fi Ë˘› «_√Î ÷˘
¿◊fl˘À‹Î_ √_√Î.’i But they are not true. Because regardless of how
much a person may have mastered samãdhi, or how thoughtful he
may be, if he begins to stay in the close company of women, there is
no way in which he could maintain his dharma.
Similarly,
i Man hoy changã to kathrotmã Gangã.

‘If the mind is pure, then a vessel of water is as good as Gangã-water,’ i.e. if the
mind is pure, there is no need to bathe in the Gangã to become pure.

The Vachanãmrut

430

regardless of how staunch a woman may be in observing dharma, if
she stays in the close company of men, then she would also in no way
be able to maintain her dharma. Thus, no one should believe that
men and women can stay in each other’s company and still be able to
maintain their dharma. This fact is true, and no one should doubt
it.
8

“When can one maintain one’s dharma? Only if those who are
paramhansas and brahmachãris abide by the niyams prescribed for
them, such as brahmacharya, will they be able to maintain their
dharma. The same is true for women; only if they abide by the
niyams prescribed for them will they be able to maintain their
dharma as well. In the same way, if all other satsangi householders
abide by the niyams prescribed for them – including not staying in
an isolated place with even one’s young mother, sister or daughter;
and not extensively looking at them either – then they will also be
able to maintain their dharma.

9

“In this way, observance of one’s dharma, upãsanã of the form of
God, listening to and narrating the divine incidents of God’s avatãrs,
and chanting His holy name – these four are the only attributes
fundamentally necessary for the jiva’s liberation.

10

“Indeed, all of you realise Me to be God. So, wherever I have
organised festivals; wherever all of the paramhansas and
brahmachãris, male and female satsangi devotees have gathered;
when I have had devotional songs sung; when I have delivered
discourses; when My puja has been performed; etc. – all such actions
and incidents should be narrated, heard, and contemplated upon in
the mind. If a person remembers these during his last moments, his
jiva will certainly attain the abode of God. In this way, all of My
divine actions and incidents, as well as the chanting of My name, are
redemptive. When I explained this to Swarupãnand Swãmi, the
agonising pain in his body due to his illness was completely relieved,
and he felt profound peace. In fact, he could see his own ãtmã very
well, yet it was of no use.

11

“One should also narrate and listen to the divine incidents of the
previous avatãrs of God such as Rãm, Krishna, etc., wherever those
incidents may have taken place.

12

“It is for the purpose of consolidating those four attributes in you
that I have extensively propagated the eight scriptures13, namely the
The Vachanãmrut

431

Shrimad Bhãgwat and others. Thus, those scriptures should be read
and studied; and only those four attributes should be emphasised.
13

“Also, realise that to try to attain liberation by only observing
dharma without the other three attributes – upãsanã of God’s form,
narrating and listening to God’s divine incidents, and chanting His
holy name – would be as difficult as trying to cross the ocean after
tying gourds to oneself. Yet, though a person has the refuge of the
form of God; though he narrates and listens to God’s divine incidents
and though he chants the name of God, if he does not observe
dharma, he should be known to be as foolish as one who tries to cross
the ocean carrying a stone slab upon his head; he should also be
known to be like an outcast.

14

“Thus, a jiva can attain liberation only by those four attributes.
Without them, there are no other means by which one can attain
liberation. However, one should only listen to and sing the devotional
songs and poems written by Muktãnand Swãmi and other sãdhus.
Devotional songs and poems composed by other poets can also be
heard and sung if they describe the divine actions and incidents of
God. But poems and devotional songs like those composed by the
likes of Kabir and Akhã should neither be sung nor heard.”

15

Concluding, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “All of you have faith in Me. If
I were to mislead you with unfounded talks, it would amount to
throwing all of you into a well and sealing it with a stone slab so that
there would be no hope of escape. However, if, because of your faith
in My words, you are misled along the wrong path, then of what good
would that be to Me? Thus, these discourses are for the sake of your
liberation. I have told you this out of affection for all of you, so now
all of you should understand it and strictly live by it.”

16

Having said this, Shriji Mahãrãj finally added, “Now, if you
have decided to act according to the discourse which I have just
delivered, then come forward one by one and touch My feet. While
doing so, take an oath and pledge, ‘I definitely want to behave
accordingly.’”

17

Thereupon, all of the paramhansas and satsangis happily got up
and touched Shriji Mahãrãj’s holy feet and bowed before Him.
Thereafter, He told the ladies to do the same. So, standing at a
distance, the ladies also pledged and took an oath to behave
accordingly. Shriji Mahãrãj was very pleased with this. Thereafter,
He retired to His residence.
The Vachanãmrut

432

|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-35 || 168 ||

Gadhadã II-36
Four Means of Maintaining Continuous Vrutti
1

On Bhãdarvã sudi Punam, Samvat 1880 [30 September 1823],
Swãmi Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated
cot on the veranda outside the west-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s
darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white clothes. At
that time, an assembly of paramhansas as well as devotees from
various places had gathered before Him.

2

Shriji Mahãrãj then said, “Please conduct a question-answer
session.”

3

Thereupon Muktãnand Swãmi asked a question: “By what
means can one continuously engage one’s vrutti on God?”

4

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “Actually, there are four methods to
achieve this. Of these, the first is that if one’s chitt has a tendency of
becoming engrossed, then it would become engrossed in everything.
So, just as it becomes engrossed in one’s son, wife, etc., it can also
become engrossed in God. Thus, that is one method.

5

“The second method is to be extremely brave. When a person
with such bravery in his heart conceives some desirous thought other
than that of God, then as he is a brave devotee, intense contemplation
arises within, thus dispelling all such desirous thoughts. Thereby,
he continuously engages his vrutti on the form of God.

6

“The third method is fear. If extreme fear of birth, death, narak
and the cycle of births and deaths exists in a person’s heart, he
continuously engages his vrutti on the form of God due to fear.

7

“The fourth method is vairãgya. A person with vairãgya –
through gnãn of the Sãnkhya scriptures – realises his own ãtmã to
be distinct from the body, and except for that ãtmã, he realises all
worldly objects to be asatya. Following this, he beholds Paramãtmã
within his ãtmã and continuously contemplates on Him.

8

“With the exception of a person on whom God bestows His
grace – regarding which there is nothing to say – people may attempt
countless other means, but without resorting to these four methods,
one will not be able to continuously engage one’s vrutti on God. Of
The Vachanãmrut

433

course, continuously engaging one’s vrutti on God is an extremely
difficult feat. It is only those whose good deeds from many many
lives have ripened who are able to do so. For others, it is very
difficult, indeed.”
9

Having thus described how to continuously engage one’s vrutti
on God’s form, Shriji Mahãrãj added, “In this world, everyone talks of
mãyã. I have seen the characteristics of that mãyã as follows:
Affection for anything other than God is itself mãyã. In fact, the
affection a person has towards his own body and its relatives and
towards one who provides for his body exceeds even the extreme
affection one has for the panchvishays. Thus, a person who has
severed affection for his body, its relations and those who provide for
his body is said to have transcended God’s mãyã. In fact, a person
who severs affection for everyone other than God develops affection
towards God. Then, when affection for God is developed, his vrutti
continuously remains on God. When that is achieved, he has nothing
further to achieve; he has become fulfilled.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-36 || 169 ||

Gadhadã II-37
Eradicating One’s Innate Natures; Even a Person
Possessing Gnãn Behaves According to His Nature
1

On Bhãdarvã vadi 1, Samvat 1880 [21 September 1823], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on the veranda outside the
west-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was
dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, an assembly of
paramhansas as well as devotees from various places had gathered
before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj asked, “In the Gitã, it is said that
even a person possessing gnãn behaves according to his naturei , and

i This in reference to the verse:

‘‚ŒÎ‡Ê¢ øCÔUÃ SflSÿÊ— ¬˝∑Î§ÃôÊÊ¸ŸflÊŸÁ¬–

¬˝∑Î§ÁÃ¢ ÿÊÁãÃ ÷ÍÃÊÁŸ ÁŸª˝„U— Á∑¢§ ∑§Á⁄UcÿÁÃH’
Sadrusham chestate svasyãhã prakruter-gnãnavan-api|
Prakrutim yãnti bhootãni nigrahaha kim karishyati||
The Vachanãmrut

434

not even the strength of self-control mentioned in the scriptures is
effective in such cases. How, then, can such innate natures be
eradicated?”
3

All of the munis thought over the question, but it appeared as if
they would not be able to answer Shriji Mahãrãj’s question.

4

Shriji Mahãrãj then said, “The answer to that is as follows:
When the Satpurush gives guidance on how to eradicate such
swabhãvs, if a person has total faith in those words; if he has deep
affection for the Satpurush giving the guidance; and no matter how
painfully strong the Satpurush’s words seem, if he accepts those
words to be for his own benefit – then his innate natures will be
eradicated. Except for this, there is no other method. Therefore,
regardless of how much God or the Satpurush insults him for the
purpose of eradicating his swabhãvs, and regardless of the harsh
words they may utter – a person who wishes to eradicate his innate
natures should not feel hurt in any way and should consider only the
virtues of the person advising him. If one behaves in this manner,
then that nature, which otherwise could not be eradicated in any
way, is eradicated.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-37 || 170 ||

Gadhadã II-38
Mãnchã Bhakta; ‘Merging’
1

On Bhãdarvã vadi 6, Samvat 1880 [26 September 1823], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a cushion with a
cylindrical pillow that had been placed on a decorated cot on the
veranda outside the east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in
Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, an
assembly of paramhansas as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him.

Even one who has gnãn behaves according to his innate nature. [In fact], all
beings act according to their [respective] natures. So of what use is [the]
repression [of one’s innate nature]?
Bhagwad Gitã: 3.33

The Vachanãmrut

435

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “If a worldly person were to
come across someone who could grant him wealth or a son, he would
immediately develop faith in that person. However, a devotee of God
never has faith in charms and spells, in witchcraft or in vulgar,
dramatic performances. If he were to have faith in charms, spells or
witchcraft, then even though he may be a satsangi, he should be
considered to be half-fallen.

3

“Having said this, though, there are not many true devotees of
God. Nonetheless, Mãnchã Bhakta of Kãriyãni was indeed a true
devotee of God. Prior to joining the Satsang fellowship, he was in the
Mãrgi sect. However, in no way did he lapse in his observance of the
vow of non-lust; instead, he remained a celibate from his childhood.

4

“Once, an alchemist was staying at his house.
After
demonstrating how he could transform copper into silver, the
alchemist told Mãnchã Bhakta, ‘Because you are very charitable, I
shall teach you this spell and show you how to transform copper into
silver.’ But Mãnchã Bhakta threatened him with a stick and drove
him out of the village, telling him, ‘I have no desire for anything
except God.’ Afterwards, when Mãnchã Bhakta joined Satsang, he
became an ekãntik bhakta of God.”

5

Continuing, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “An ekãntik bhakta would
firstly possess the virtue of ãtmã-realisation; secondly, he would
possess vairãgya; thirdly, he would be staunch in his observance of
dharma; and fourthly, he would possess profound bhakti for Shri
Krishna Bhagwãn. When such an ekãntik bhakta abandons his
physical body, he ‘merges’ into Shri Krishna Bhagwãn, whereas one
who is not ekãntik ‘merges’ into either Brahmã and the other deities,
or into Sankarshan, Aniruddha, etc. However, without attaining the
ekãntik state, one cannot ‘merge’ into Shri Krishna Bhagwãn.

6

“Such ‘merging’ should be understood as follows: A person who is
very greedy is said to ‘merge’ into money; a person who is very lustful
is said to ‘merge’ into his beloved; and when a person who is very rich
but childless receives a son, he is said to ‘merge’ into his son. In this
way, a person should be known as having ‘merged’ into whatever he
is attached to. However, this ‘merging’ is not like that of water
merging with water or like fire merging with fire.

7

“If a devotee has ‘merged’ into his Ishtadev, he would never
develop affection for anything else except his Ishtadev. In fact, he
would continuously think of Him. If he were forced to live without
The Vachanãmrut

436

his Ishtadev, he would live life in days of deep misery, but in no way
would he be happy.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-38 || 171 ||

Gadhadã II-39
Natural Virtues
1

On Bhãdarvã vadi 10, Samvat 1880 [29 September 1823], Shriji
Mahãrãj arrived at Lakshmivãdi on horseback from Dãdã Khãchar’s
darbãr in Gadhadã. There, He was sitting on a large, decorated cot
that had been placed on the platform there. He was dressed entirely
in white clothes. At that time, an assembly of paramhansas as well
as devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Please reveal to Me the virtues
which are natural to you – virtues which do not recede even under
the influence of adverse places, times, actions, company, etc.”

3

Having said this, Shriji Mahãrãj began Himself, “Here, let Me
first tell you the virtues that are natural to Me.” He then said,
“Firstly, it is My nature that regardless of how much physical
contact of the panchvishays I encounter, I do not harbour any desire
for them in My mind – not even in My dreams.

4

“Secondly, regardless of how much pravrutti I may be physically
involved in, when I look within towards My ãtmã, all My vruttis
withdraw into My ãtmã – just like a tortoise withdraws its limbs –
and I experience profound bliss.

5

“Thirdly, I have a very strong conviction that God possesses a
form. That is, Shri Krishna Vãsudev resides in His Akshardhãm –
which is full of chaitanya and full of divine light – possessing an
eternal and definite form. God, thus possessing a form, is also the
all-doer, since that which is formless can accomplish nothing. In
fact, so firm is My conviction that God possesses a form that even
though I have read and heard many Vedãnta scriptures, My
conviction has not been dislodged.

6

“Fourthly, if I come to know of any man or woman that is
pretentiously offering bhakti to God merely as an outward show, but
that that person is not a genuine devotee of God, then My mind is not
pleased upon seeing such a person. Nor do I even feel comfortable
with that person, because My mind only becomes pleased when I see
The Vachanãmrut

437

a genuine devotee of God, and I am only comfortable with such
people.
7

“I have thus described to you these four virtues that are natural
to Me. Now, all of you may tell Me yours.”

8

Thereupon, the senior paramhansas and devotees described the
virtues they possessed.

9

Shriji Mahãrãj then said, “For those who are senior amongst
you, the observance of the vow of non-lust is an absolute must. If one
has a deficiency in some other aspect, it may well do, but firmness in
this is absolutely essential. Because, the example set by the seniors
is what is followed by everyone else.”

10

After delivering this discourse, Shriji Mahãrãj returned to Dãdã
Khãchar’s darbãr, performed the ãrti, and joined in the ‘Nãrãyan’
dhunya and prayers. Thereafter, an assembly of all of the sãdhus
and devotees was held there.

11

At that time, Shriji Mahãrãj asked the senior paramhansas, “I
have greatly expounded the importance of the fifth and tenth cantos
of the Shrimad Bhãgwat. Now, I would like all of you to explain the
fundamental principle of those two cantos as you have come to
understand it.”

12

All of the senior paramhansas offered explanations according to
there own understanding.

13

Thereafter Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Here, allow Me to tell you the
fundamental principle of those two cantos. But first of all, what can
be called a fundamental principle? It is that which when once
explained to even the most learned scholars or scriptural readers or
highly intellectual people, they would have to believe it to be
absolutely true and would have to agree with it. In no way could
they doubt, ‘This might not be so.’ That is what can be called a
fundamental principle.

14

“Now, of the two cantos, the fundamental principle of the tenth
canto is that that whom the Upanishads – i.e., Vedãnta – as well as
the Shrutis and Smrutis describe as being Brahma, luminous, the
embodiment of gnãn, the essence, subtle; and who is described as
non-manifest by various other terms such as kshetragna, the cause of
all, Parabrahma Purushottam, Vãsudev, Vishnu, Nãrãyan, nirgun,
one who is untainted by mãyã, etc. – is this manifest form of Shri
Krishna Vãsudev, the son of Vasudev. Thus, wherever there are
The Vachanãmrut

438

passages containing hymns in the tenth canto, the words of those
hymns refer to this manifest form of Shri Krishna Bhagwãn; there is
no mention of anyone being superior to Shri Krishna Bhagwãn. The
tenth canto also mentions that only Shri Krishna Bhagwãn is the
cause of the creation, sustenance and dissolution of the whole cosmos.
15

“The greatness of that Shri Krishna Bhagwãn is narrated in the
fifth canto. Also mentioned are the many different forms assumed by
Shri Krishna Bhagwãn in various khands for the sustenance of the
world and for the sake of bestowing bliss upon his devotees. In
addition, all those who abide by the niyams prescribed by Shri
Krishna Bhagwãn attain a great status, whereas those who do not
abide by those niyams fall from their status, even if they are great.
It is also said that if a common person breaches those niyams, he will
certainly regress.

16

“That same Shri Krishna Vãsudev, who as a child gave the
spectacular darshan of the manifest, four-armed form to Vasudev and
Devki, is in fact the form of the eternal Vãsudev.

17

“Furthermore, that Shri Krishna Bhagwãn had behaved
according to dharma, arth and kãm. All those who narrate or even
listen to the divine incidents of God in which he observed dharma,
arth and kãm will be released from all of their sins and will attain
the highest state of enlightenment. Also, the birth, actions and form
of that Vãsudev Bhagwãn are all divine. In fact, Vãsudev Shri
Krishna alone is supreme.

18

“This is the fundamental principle of those two cantos. Even
those who have attained the brahmarup state, like Shukji, must also
worship and offer bhakti to Shri Krishna Bhagwãn. Also, as
mentioned in the tenth canto, even the likes of Shukji should narrate
and listen to the divine incidents of God. In fact, Shukji himself has
said,

The Vachanãmrut

439

¬Á⁄UÁŸÁDÔUÃÙ˘Á¬ ŸÒªÈ¸áÿ ©U?Ê◊o£Ù∑§‹Ë‹ÿÊ–
ªÎ„UËÃøÃÊ ⁄UÊ¡·¸ •ÊÅÿÊŸ¢ ÿŒœËÃflÊŸ˜H i
19

“One should also keep a firm conviction regarding the form of
that Vãsudev Bhagwãn. Because if a person has a firm conviction of
the form of God, and if he happens to commit some sin, then he will
be freed of that sin – because there is always some form of atonement
prescribed for committing a sin. However, to realise God as being
formless is a sin much graver than even the five grave sins10. There
is no atonement for that sin.

20

“Conversely, if a person realises God to possess a form and is
convinced of this, then even if he happens to commit a sin, there is
nothing to worry about. Because by the grace of God, all of those sins
will be burnt and his jiva will attain God.

21

“Therefore, one should keep a firm conviction of the form of God
and staunchly worship Him. This is My message to you. So, please
imbibe these words firmly in your lives.”

22

Having given this advice to everyone, Shriji Mahãrãj departed to
have His meals.
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-39 || 172 ||

Gadhadã II-40
Offering One Extra Prostration
1

On Ãso vadi 3, Samvat 1880 [22 October 1823], Shriji Mahãrãj
was in His residence in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. After
bathing and donning white clothes, He sat upon His seat. Then,
after completing His daily routine of performing puja of God, He was
offering prostrations in the northern direction to Shri Krishna
i Parinishthito’pi nairgunya uttama-shloka-leelayã|

Gruheeta-chetã rãjarshe ãkhyãnam yad-adheetavãn||
O King [Parikshit]! Despite being perfectly poised in the nirgun state, I
[Shukdevji] – having been attracted by the divine actions and incidents of God –
studied the [Shrimad Bhãgwat] epic.
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 2.1.9

The Vachanãmrut

440

Bhagwãn.
It so happened that on that day, He offered one
prostration more than He usually offered everyday.
2

Noticing this, Shuk Muni asked, “Mahãrãj, why did You offer
one extra prostration today?”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “Everyday, after bowing to Shri
Krishna Bhagwãn, I used to pray, ‘Mahãrãj, if any feelings of I-ness
and my-ness for this body and its relations exist, then please
eradicate them.’ Today, however, the following thought occurred to
Me: ‘No other sin causes more misery to a person than when he
somehow – knowingly or unknowingly – harms a devotee of God by
thought, word or deed.’ Thus, I offered one extra prostration to atone
for any mistake that may have occurred of knowingly or
unknowingly harming some devotee of God by thought, word or deed.

4

“Indeed, I have come to the conclusion that the extent of damage
and misery incurred as a result of harming a devotee of God is not
incurred by any other sin. On the other hand, there is no spiritual
endeavour that benefits a person and gives as much happiness as
that of serving a devotee of God by thought, word and deed.

5

“It is because of the influence of avarice, egotism, jealousy and
anger that one spites a devotee of God. Only one who does not possess
these four can revere a devotee of God. Therefore, one who wishes to
experience supreme happiness in this very body and also experience
supreme happiness after death should never harm a devotee of God –
by thought, word or deed.

6

“If, however, one does somehow harm a devotee of God, then one
should verbally pray to him for forgiveness; and physically and
mentally, one should prostrate before him and resolve to behave in
such a manner so as to never harm him again. However, one should
not behave in such a way that one performs prostrations after
harming someone once, only to then harm him again and perform
prostrations again.

7

“So that you remember this fact daily, from today, all sãdhus
and all devotees should observe the following vow: After performing
puja of God, one should offer prostrations according to one’s daily
practice.
After this, to compensate for having knowingly or
unknowingly harmed a devotee of God by thought, word or deed
during the day, one should perform one extra prostration daily. This
is My command; so please do abide by it.”
The Vachanãmrut

441

|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-40 || 173 ||

Gadhadã II-41
A Bone in the Form of Egotism
1

On Kãrtik vadi 11, Samvat 1880 [28 November 1823], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot on
the veranda outside the west-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr
in Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white clothes. He was
wearing garlands of yellow flowers around His neck, and tassels of
yellow flowers had been inserted in His pãgh. At that time, an
assembly of munis as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him.

2

Out of compassion, Shriji Mahãrãj then began to preach to His
devotees, saying, “When a person who wishes to worship God receives
an opportunity to serve God and His devotees, he should serve them
considering it to be his extremely great fortune. Moreover, he should
do so only with bhakti, for the sake of pleasing God and for his own
liberation – not for the sake of receiving praise from others.

3

“The nature of a person, however, is such that he only enjoys
doing that which satisfies his vanity. Without that, he does not enjoy
performing even bhakti of God. For example, a dog takes a dry bone
to an isolated place to chew on. As a result of the chewing, its mouth
is abraded and the bone becomes covered in blood. Then licking the
bone, the dog becomes overjoyed. But little does the fool realise, ‘The
taste that I am enjoying is that of the blood from my own mouth.’ In
the same way, even a devotee of God is unable to forsake the bone in
the form of egotism. In fact, all of the spiritual endeavours he
performs are governed by vanity; they are not performed for the sole
purpose of pleasing God, thinking of them as bhakti towards God.
Moreover, even of the bhakti that he does offer to God, he does so only
when it nourishes his pride, but not for the sole purpose of pleasing
God.

4

“There must be very few devotees of the likes of Ratanji and
Miyãji who offer bhakti to God solely for the purpose of pleasing God
without any cravings for praise. Not everyone, however, is capable of
forsaking the taste of praise.”

The Vachanãmrut

442

5

In reference to this, Muktãnand Swãmi recited a couplet by
Tulsidãs:

∑§Ÿ∑§ ÃÖÿÙ ∑§ÊÁ◊ŸË ÃÖÿÙ ÃÖÿÙ œÊÃÈ ∑§Ù ‚¢ª–
ÃÈ‹‚Ë ‹ÉÊÈ ÷Ù¡Ÿ ∑§⁄UË ¡Ëfl ◊ÊŸ∑§ ⁄¢UªH i
6

Hearing this couplet, Shriji Mahãrãj added, “The enjoyment
which one experiences from vanity cannot be obtained from any other
object. Thus, amongst all devotees, a person who forsakes vanity and
worships God should be known to be an extremely great devotee.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-41 || 174 ||

Gadhadã II-42
Akshar Has Both Sagun and Nirgun Aspects; The
Keyii
1

On Mãgshar vadi 12, Samvat 1880 [29 December 1823], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on the veranda outside the
east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was
dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, an assembly of munis
as well as devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Bhagwadãnand Swãmi asked Shriji Mahãrãj,
“Mahãrãj, in what way do countless millions of brahmãnds dwell
within each and every pore of God? Also, where in the brahmãnds do
the avatãrs of God manifest?”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “There are two aspects of Purushottam
Bhagwãn’s Akshardhãm. The first is the sagun aspect, and the
other is the nirgun aspect. Purushottam Nãrãyan, on the other
hand, cannot be described as sagun, nor can He be described as
nirgun. The distinction of sagun and nirgun applies only to Akshar.

i Kanak tajyo kãmini tajyo, tajyo dhãtuko sang|

Tulsi laghu bhojan kari, jive mãnke rang||
Tulsi says: renounced he has women, wealth and possessions;
But lives he does on praises alone, the greatest of all obsessions.
ii

In the title, ‘The Key’ refers to the fact that Aksharbrahma is the ‘key’ to
unlocking the greatness of Purushottam.

The Vachanãmrut

443

4

“The nirgun aspect of Akshar has an extremely subtle form,
smaller than even an anu, while the sagun form is much larger than
even the largest of objects. Countless millions of brahmãnds dwell
like mere atoms in each and every hair of that Akshar. It is not that
those brahmãnds become small compared to Akshar; they still
remain encircled by the eight barriers5. Rather, it is because of the
extreme vastness of Akshar that those brahmãnds appear so small.
Take Mount Girnãr as an example. Compared to Mount Meru, it
appears to be extremely small. However, compared to Mount
Lokãlok, Mount Meru itself appears to be extremely small. In the
same way, the brahmãnds remain exactly as they are, but in
comparison to the extreme vastness of Akshar, they appear to be
extremely small. This is why they are described as being like atoms.

5

“Aksharbrahma itself is like the sun in the sense that when the
sun rises, all ten directionsi can be determined in relation to it.
Akshardhãm is like that; i.e., above, below, on all four sides of that
Akshar – in fact, in all directions – are millions of brahmãnds.

6

“Moreover, God – Purushottam – forever remains present in that
Akshardhãm.
His will always prevails.
While remaining in
Akshardhãm itself, He manifests in whatever form is required in
whichever brahmãnd. For example, Shri Krishna Bhagwãn had only
one form, yet during the rãs episode he assumed as many forms as
there were gopis.
In the same way, Purushottam Bhagwãn
manifests in whatever form is required in whichever brahmãnd –
while simultaneously dwelling in Akshardhãm.
Actually, He
Himself forever dwells in Akshardhãm. In fact, wherever that form
of Purushottam resides, that is the very centre of Akshardhãm.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-42 || 175 ||

i

The ten directions are: (1) Uttar – North, (2) Ishãn – Northeast, (3) Purva –
East, (4) Agni – Southeast, (5) Dakshin – South, (6) Nairutya – Southwest,
(7) Pashchim – West, (8) Vãyavya – Northwest, (9) Urdhva – up, (10) Adhah –
down.

The Vachanãmrut

444

Gadhadã II-43
Brahmaswarup Love
1

On Posh sudi 4, Samvat 1880 [5 January 1824], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was seated on a cushion with a cylindrical
pillow at the residence of the Ayodhyãwãsis in Dãdã Khãchar’s
darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white clothes. At
that time, Premãnand Swãmi was singing devotional songs to the
accompaniment of a sarodã, while munis as well as devotees from
various places had gathered before Him in an assembly.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Let us conduct a questionanswer session.” So saying, Shriji Mahãrãj Himself asked, “A
devotee of God who is gunãtit behaves only as the ãtmã, above the
influence of the three gunas – i.e., above sattvagun in the form of
vairãgya, above rajogun in the form of desires for vishays, and above
tamogun in the form of passiveness. He harbours absolutely no
thoughts, and experiences a deep sleep-like state. Now, does such a
nirgun devotee who behaves as the ãtmã in this manner have love for
God, or not? That is the question.”

3

Muktãnand Swãmi replied, “One who behaves as the ãtmã does
have love for God.”

4

Hearing the reply, Shriji Mahãrãj asked, “Is the love of such a
devotee who behaves as the ãtmã of the same qualities as the ãtmã,
or different?”

5

Muktãnand Swãmi replied, “That love is of the same qualities as
the ãtmã.”

6

Shriji Mahãrãj then explained, “Regarding the love developed for
God while behaving as the ãtmã, Madhvãchãrya, Nimbãrk and
Vallabhãchãrya have all described that love as brahmaswarup.
Therefore,
only
one
who
has
love
for
God
having become gunãtit, is brahmaswarup. Such is the principle of
the great ãchãryas.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-43 || 176 ||

The Vachanãmrut

445

Gadhadã II-44
The Characteristics of Godly and Demonic People
1

On Posh sudi 8, Samvat 1880 [9 January 1824], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on the veranda outside the eastfacing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed
entirely in white clothes. At that time, an assembly of munis as well
as devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj asked Muktãnand Swãmi, “When a
person perceives a flaw in a devotee, does that person perceive the
same amount of flaws in that devotee as he had noticed previously, or
does he perceive more flaws?”

3

Muktãnand Swãmi replied, “Apparently, he perceives the same
amount of flaws as he previously perceived.”

4

Shriji Mahãrãj then said, “You have missed the point of the
question. If he perceives exactly the same amount of flaws, then how
can you say that he has perceived a flaw? In actual fact, it is due to
the influence of adverse places, times, actions, company, etc., that his
intellect becomes spoiled; and that is why he perceives more flaws.
In this situation, one should realise that the blemish of adverse
circumstances has tainted his intellect.

5

“Moreover, I personally feel, ‘If one previously has kept the
company of the great Purush or has had the darshan of God, then
one will only perceive one’s own flaws but will never perceive flaws in
any other devotee of God.’ A person with such characteristics should
be known to be godly.

6

“On the other hand, a person who is demonic never perceives
even a single flaw within himself; instead, he perceives only flaws in
other devotees. A person with such an intellect should be known to
be demonic. If such a demonic person happens to be in the Satsang
fellowship, or if he stays in the mandal of sãdhus, he will be similar
to Kãlnemi, Rãvan and Rãhu; but he will not be influenced by the
company of sãdhus.

7

“Thus one who is a staunch devotee of God perceives only his
own flaws, but never does he notice the flaws of other devotees.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-44 || 177 ||

The Vachanãmrut

446

Gadhadã II-45
Expelling the Horde of the Fifty-One Bhuts i
1

On Posh vadi 1, Samvat 1880 [17 January 1824], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on the veranda outside the eastfacing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed
entirely in white clothes. At that time, an assembly of munis as well
as devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “All of you munis,
brahmachãris, satsangi householders, pãrshads and Ayodhyãwãsis
are said to be Mine. So if I was not vigilant in having all of you
behave accordingly, and if you were to then behave waywardly, I
would not be able to bear this. In actual fact, I do not want even the
slightest imperfection to remain in those who are said to be Mine.
However, you should also remain very vigilant, because if you allow
even a little carelessness, your footing in Satsang will not last.

3

“Furthermore, as you are devotees of God, I do not wish to leave
any form of improper swabhãvs within your hearts. Nor do I wish to
allow any trace of any of mãyã’s three gunas, ten indriyas, ten prãns,
four antahkarans, five bhuts, panchvishays, and the deities of the 14
realms to remain. Instead, I wish to make all of you such that you
offer bhakti to God realising your true form to be the ãtmã, which is
characterised by eternal existence and is free from all of these mãyik
flaws. In fact, I wish not to allow any influence of mãyã to remain
within you. If all of your imperfections are not eradicated in this
very lifetime, then I will take you to Badrikãshram, where, by
performing austerities, all of your worldly desires will be burnt to
ashes; or I will take you to Shwetdwip and burn all of your worldly
desires to ashes by having you perform austerities with the nirannamuktas. But I do not wish to allow any affection for anything except
God to remain. For this reason, then, all of the devotees and munis
should remain vigilant.”

4

Having delivered this discourse, Shriji Mahãrãj retired to His
residence.
i The fifty-one bhuts are the three gunas, the ten indriyas, the ten prãns, the

four antahkarans, the five bhuts, the five types of sense objects, and the
presiding deities of the fourteen loks.

The Vachanãmrut

447

5

Later, in the evening of that same day, Shriji Mahãrãj presided
over another assembly that He had gathered together. After the ãrti
was completed, He said, “By performing sãttvik karmas, one goes to
Devlok; by performing rãjasik karmas, one goes to Mrutyulok; and by
performing tãmasik karmas, one is consigned to the lower realms.
But someone may doubt, ‘If by performing rãjasik karmas one attains
Mrutyulok, then that suggests that all those on Mrutyulok should
experience the same joys and miseries.’ So, the answer to this is that
although there is only one particular rajogun, countless types of
distinctions are created within it due to the influence of differing
places, times, etc. Thus, it is not the case that there is one, certain
type of rãjasik karma. Rather, the type of karma performed varies
according to the factors of place, time, company and action.

6

“Having said this, though, if one performs some karma which
displeases the Sant of God or an avatãr of God, one will suffer
miseries similar to those of Yampuri in this very body here in
Mrutyulok. On the other hand, if one performs a karma by which
God and His Bhakta are pleased, then, in this very body, one will
enjoy bliss similar to that of attaining the highest state of
enlightenment.

7

“Furthermore, if one were to displease God and His Sant, then
despite the fact that one had performed such karmas that would have
led one to swarg, all those karmas would be destroyed and one would
instead be consigned to narak. Conversely, if one were to perform a
karma by which God and His Sant are pleased, then even if one were
destined to fall into narak, all of one’s impure karmas would be
destroyed and one would instead attain the highest state of
enlightenment. Therefore, those who are wise should behave only in
a manner that would please God and His Bhakta. One should even
advise all of one’s relatives, ‘We should behave only in a manner that
would please God and His Sant, and in a manner by which they
would shower their grace upon us.’

8

“In fact, Agni must have also pleased God and His Sant, because
only then would he have attained his light. Surya, Chandra and all
others who possess light, must also have pleased God and His Sant
by performing pious karmas, for only then would they have attained
such light. In fact, all of those who are happy in Devlok and
Mrutyulok must have pleased God and His Sant, because it is by
their grace that they are happy.
The Vachanãmrut

448

9

“Therefore, one who aspires for the good of one’s own ãtmã
should observe the swadharma prescribed in the sacred scriptures,
and do only that which pleases God and His Sant.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-45 || 178 ||

Gadhadã II-46
The ‘Death-line’; Falling from Ekãntik Dharma
1

On Posh vadi 11, Samvat 1880 [26 January 1824], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on the veranda outside the westfacing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed
entirely in white clothes, and had covered Himself with a yellow
blanket made of chhint. At that time, some sãdhus were singing
devotional songs to the accompaniment of a jhãnjh and mrudang,
while other munis as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him in an assembly.

2

After the singing concluded, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “A Satpurush
living in this world is not pleased or pained upon seeing the worldly
progress or regress of a person. However, when someone’s mind
recedes from the path of God, he does become grieved. After all, life is
so short; and if a person’s afterlife is ruined, it would indeed be a
great loss for that person.

3

“In fact, God assumes avatãrs upon earth for the purpose of
establishing dharma, and that too, not simply for the establishment
of the dharma of one’s caste and ãshram. After all, even the
ãchãryas of pravrutti dharma, such as the Saptarshi and others have
established the dharma of the four castes and ãshrams. God does
not, however, assume avatãrs solely for that purpose; He assumes
avatãrs to expound the dharma of His ekãntik bhaktas.

4

“For such ekãntik bhaktas, leaving the body is not considered to
be death; rather, for them, falling from that ekãntik dharma is true
death. This occurs when an aversion arises in one’s heart towards
God or His Sant. It is then that that devotee should be known to
have fallen from the dharma of ekãntik bhaktas. If, for example, he
has fallen due to anger, it should be known that he has received the
body of a snake; and if he has fallen due to lust, then it should be
known that he has taken birth as an evil spirit or a demon.

The Vachanãmrut

449

5

“Nevertheless, despite having attained such bodies and having
fallen from ekãntik dharma, those who observe dharma or perform
austerities will attain Devlok due to their observance of dharma or
their performance of austerities.
However, one who bears an
aversion towards God or His Sant will certainly not attain the abode
of God. On the other hand, even if a person has committed the five
grave sins10, if he has not perceived a flaw in God or His Sant, then
his sins will be burned, and he will dwell in the abode of God.
Therefore, to perceive flaws in God and His Bhakta is a graver sin
than committing the five grave sins.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-46 || 179 ||

Gadhadã II-47
A Split in the Pruthvi Down to Pãtãl
1

On Mahã vadi 10, Samvat 1880 [24 February 1824], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on the veranda outside the eastfacing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed
entirely in white clothes and had covered Himself with a yellow
blanket made of chhint. At that time, an assembly of munis as well
as devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “If a person has a group of
sãdhus staying with him, and if he can sincerely look after them in a
gracious manner, those sãdhus will happily stay with him.
However, if he does not know how to look after them, they will not
stay with him.

3

“Furthermore, if a sãdhu is eager to attain liberation, he would
become increasingly overjoyed when I do something that may upset
him or when I denounce the vishays. For example, Muktãnand
Swãmi has contracted tuberculosis, and so he is restricted from
eating yoghurt, milk and any sweet or fried foods. A wise person
would think to himself, ‘This disease has restricted all tasty food and
drink; thus I wonder if I have actually attained the company of a
great sãdhu in the guise of tuberculosis!’ This is how a wise person
would view the situation.
Why?
Because a person’s desires
regarding the genitals and the stomach are, in fact, characteristics of
an unholy person. But tuberculosis is such a disease that it removes
both flaws. Thus, an aspirant should not feel hurt when the
Satpurush, in the same manner as that disease, denounces vishays.
The Vachanãmrut

450

4

“Also, if a person is staying with a senior sãdhu due to the
temptation of obtaining tasty food or drink, or due to the temptation
of obtaining nice clothes, or due to the temptation of collecting objects
that he likes, then he should not be considered a sãdhu at all.
Instead, he should be known to be an extremely wretched person and
like a dog. One who has such corrupt intentions will ultimately fall
from Satsang.

5

“Furthermore, if someone should give a sãdhu a nice object, one
who becomes jealous as well as one who is greedy for the
panchvishays are both much worse than one who has committed the
five grave sins10. Therefore, one who is wise should remain in the
company of sãdhus and not harbour any impure intentions within.
After all, this assembly is like the assembly in Badrikãshram and
Shwetdwip; if a person’s worldly desires are not eradicated here,
where else will he be able to eradicate them?

6

“Moreover, our jivas have previously indulged in the
panchvishays through countless bodies, as deities, humans, etc.
Nevertheless, we have not been content with those vishays.
Therefore, now that we are devotees of God, indulging in the vishays
for a further year, or two years, or maybe even five years will still not
fulfill us. It is as if the earth has been split down to Pãtãl, and we
begin to fill it with water – obviously, it can never be filled.
Similarly, the indriyas have never become satisfied by the vishays,
and they never will be. So, now, one should eradicate one’s
attachment to the vishays. Furthermore, one should consider the
virtues of the sãdhu who speaks to one harshly and should not think
ill of him. This is explained in the following devotional song
composed by Muktãnand Swãmi: ‘ÂÒ‚Ì µ’fl Â›fi ¿flÎ‰ı, ÷˘› ÁÎ‘fiı Á_√ı
flËÌ±ı flı...’i. Thus, one should seize this opportunity and die only after
eradicating one’s impure desires; one should not die with one’s
impure desires still remaining.

7

“Having said this though, one should keep the following desire:
‘After leaving this body, I want to become brahmarup like Nãrad, the
Sanakãdik, Shukji, etc., and offer bhakti to God.’ Even if during this
i Shooli upar shayan karãve toya sãdhune sange rahiye re…

One should remain in the association of sãdhus – even if one has to suffer the
pain of a shuli.

The Vachanãmrut

451

process one has to go to dwell in Brahmalok or Indralok, there is
nothing to worry about. Because if one goes for ablutions and then
falls headfirst into the gutter, one should take a bath and become
pure again; one should not remain in the filth. Similarly, if a person
harbours pure desires and as a result attains Brahmalok or Indralok,
he should think, ‘I have fallen headfirst into the gutter.’ Thinking in
this manner, he should discard the pleasures of Brahmalok and
Indralok using the strength of his pure desires and make his way to
the abode of God. He should resolve not to stop anywhere in between.
8

“Also, just as the householders or renunciants serve us, we
should also realise their greatness. For example, Mulji Brahmachãri
realises My greatness and serves Me. In the same way, I realise his
greatness. Thus, as the householders serve us by providing food and
clothes, we should also realise their greatness and serve them by
preaching to them. In this way, we should foster fraternity among
devotees of God by realising each others’ greatness.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-47 || 180 ||

Gadhadã II-48
The ‘Vandu’ Devotional Songs;
Taking Birth in the Company of the Sant
1

On Mahã vadi 14, Samvat 1880 [28 February 1824], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on the veranda outside the eastfacing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed
entirely in white clothes and was wearing new, white kanthis made
from tulsi beads around His neck. In addition to this, tassels of
yellow flowers decorated His pãgh, and garlands of flowers adorned
His neck. At that time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees
from various places had gathered before Him.

2

In the assembly, Premãnand Swãmi was singing ‘Vandu
Sahajãnand ras roop, anupam sãrne re lol…’ – devotional songs
useful for meditation. After he had finished singing, Shriji Mahãrãj
commented, “The devotional songs you sang were very nice. After
listening to them I thought in My mind, ‘Since this sãdhu
contemplates upon God’s form in this way, let Me get up and
prostrate before him.’

The Vachanãmrut

452

3

“If a person is able to contemplate upon God in his antahkaran
in this manner, and if he were to die while still harbouring such a
desire for God, he would definitely not have to take another birth. If
he engages in such contemplation of God, he has certainly attained
the highest state of enlightenment while alive. In addition, he can be
said to be in the process of becoming a niranna-mukta just like the
niranna-muktas in Shwetdwip. Such a person performs the bodily
activities that are necessary absolutely effortlessly. In fact, one who
is able to contemplate upon God’s form has become fulfilled and has
nothing more left to do.

4

“On the other hand, if a person dies while contemplating upon
things other than God, there will be no end to his miseries for
countless millions of years. So now that such an opportunity has
arisen, one should seize it and, after discarding any thoughts about
objects other than God, should contemplate upon His form only.

5

“If, however, one is unable to contemplate upon God’s form, one
should remain in the company of such a sãdhu who possesses
dharma, gnãn, vairãgya and bhakti. As for Myself, I have only this
desire within: When I abandon this body, although there will be no
reason for Me to take birth again, I feel in My heart that I should
make a reason and take birth in the company of such sãdhus. This
is all I wish for.

6

“But if a person is able to contemplate upon God as described in
the above devotional song, then he is freed from the bondage of kãl,
karma and mãyã. In fact, regardless of the family in which such a
person happens to be born, the parents of such a person should also
be considered to be fulfilled. Conversely, one who contemplates upon
the vishays, and not upon God, should be considered as being totally
lost.

7

“After all, regardless of the life form in which a person takes
birth, he will be able to have a wife, a son and possessions such as
wealth and other objects. However, the company of such a sãdhu
who is a knower of Brahma, as well as the direct darshan and
contemplation of Shri Vãsudev Bhagwãn are extremely rare. Thus,
there is no greater advantage of possessing this human body than
being able to constantly contemplate upon God in one’s heart – just
as a person engrossed in the vishays constantly contemplates upon
them in his antahkaran. Such a person is also the greatest amongst
all devotees of God. Even if that devotee does indulge in the
The Vachanãmrut

453

panchvishays – i.e., sights, sounds, smells, tastes and touch – all
would be related only to God. His ears wish to continuously listen to
discourses related to God; his skin wishes to touch God; his eyes wish
to have the darshan of God and His Sant; his tongue wishes to taste
the prasãd of God; and his nose wishes to smell the fragrance of
flowers and tulsi which have been offered to God. Apart from God, he
considers nothing else to be a source of happiness. One who behaves
in this manner can be called an ekãntik bhakta of God.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-48 || 181 ||

Gadhadã II-49
A Great Difference Exists between God’s Form and
Mãyik Forms; Not Becoming Content with
Spiritual Discourses, Devotional Songs, etc.
1

On Fãgun sudi 2, Samvat 1880 [1 March 1824], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a cushion with a cylindrical
pillow that had been placed on a large, decorated cot on the veranda
outside the west-facing medi in front of the mandir of Shri
Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was
dressed entirely in white clothes, and a garland of white flowers also
hung from His pãgh. At that time, an assembly of munis as well as
devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “There is a great difference
between the manifest form of God and mãyik forms. However, those
who are ignorant and those who are utter fools consider God’s form
and mãyik forms to be the same. Those who see mãyik forms and
those who contemplate upon mãyik forms spend countless millions of
years wandering in the cycle of births and deaths. In comparison,
those who do the darshan of God’s form and those who contemplate
upon it escape from the bondage of kãl, karma and mãyã; attain the
highest state of enlightenment; and become attendants of God. It is
for this reason that My mind never becomes satiated with spiritual
discourses, devotional songs, talks related to God or meditation of
God. All of you should also do the same.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-49 || 182 ||

The Vachanãmrut

454

Gadhadã II-50
The Fundamental Principle; Worldly Attachment
1

On the night of Chaitra vadi 2, Samvat 1880 [15 April 1824],
Swãmi Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on the veranda
outside the west-facing medi in front of the mandir of Shri
Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was
dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, an assembly of munis
as well as devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Because I consider all of you to
be Mine, today I am going to reveal to you My fundamental
principle.” He then continued, “Just as rivers merge into the sea,
just as a sati and a moth burn in a fire, and just as the brave
sacrifice themselves on the battlefield, in the same way, I have kept
My ãtmã absorbed in the pure and perfect Brahma. I have also
forever attached Myself with undying love to Purushottam Bhagwãn
– who possesses a definite form – and to His devotees dwelling in the
radiant Akshardhãm. In fact, I have no love for anything other than
them. This is what I constantly experience.

3

“Outwardly, I do not make a display of the intensity of My
renunciation. However, when I look into My heart and towards the
hearts of other devotees, even the senior paramhansas and senior
sãnkhya-yogi women all seem to have some trace of the world
remaining – whereas worldly desires never arise in My heart, not
even in My dreams.

4

“It also seems to Me that no one is capable of making Me falter
from My bhakti towards God and His Bhakta.

5

“In addition, even before one had been graced with the
attainment of God, kãl – a power of God – was unable to destroy the
jiva; karmas were unable to destroy the jiva; not even mãyã was able
to absorb the jiva within itself. So now, having attained God, why
should one worry about kãl, karma and mãyã? Bearing this in mind,
I have boldly resolved that I do not want to develop love for anyone
except God and His Bhakta.

6

“Furthermore, I do not wish to leave any trace of the world in
the hearts of whosoever keeps My company. Why? Because I get
along only with those whose resolve is similar to Mine. But if one
has desires for worldly pleasures, then even if I try to develop
affection for that person, I cannot do so. Thus, only those devotees of
The Vachanãmrut

455

God who are free of worldly desires are dear to Me. What I have just
told you is My personal principle.”
7

In this manner, Shriji Mahãrãj talked to His devotees for the
sake of their enlightenment.
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-50 || 183 ||

Gadhadã II-51
The Characteristics of One Who Behaves as the Ãtmã
1

On Chaitra vadi 9, Samvat 1880 [22 April 1824], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a cushion with a cylindrical
pillow that had been placed on a large, decorated cot on the veranda
outside the south-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in
Gadhadã. At that time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees
from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj asked the paramhansas, “Often,
when the jiva enters deep sleep, it experiences profound peace,
whereas at other times, even when it enters deep sleep, its
restlessness does not subside. What is the reason for this? That is
My question.”

3

The senior paramhansas attempted to answer the question but
were unable to give a precise answer.

4

So Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “That is due to the increase of the
force of rajogun. So, even during the state of deep sleep, the
disturbance of rajogun joins with tamogun. As a result, one
experiences a feeling of restlessness even within deep sleep. Thus, as
long as the influence of the gunas remains within a person, he will
never experience happiness; only when he behaves as the ãtmã does
he become happy.”

5

Thereupon Muktãnand Swãmi asked,
characteristics of one who behaves as the ãtmã?

6

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “No one is said to be as powerful as Shiv
and Brahmã. In fact, they are the gurus of even Nãrad. Indeed, it is
difficult for others to behave as they do – as brahmaswarup. Having
said that, though, when the eight factors of place, time, action,
company, mantra, scriptures, initiation and meditation became
unfavourable, the adverse influence caused great distress in the
The Vachanãmrut

“What

are

the

456

hearts of even the likes of Shiv and Brahmã. Therefore, regardless of
how nirgun one may be, or even if one behaves as the ãtmã, if one
encounters adverse circumstances, one will most certainly experience
distress within. So, no one can ever become happy by breaching the
disciplines laid down by the great Purush.
7

“For this reason, then, all renunciants should abide by the
dharma of renunciants, all householders should abide by the dharma
of householders, and all women should abide by the dharma of
women. Even in this, one will not become happy if one behaves less
than what is prescribed; nor will one become happy by behaving
beyond what is prescribed. After all, the dharma prescribed in the
scriptures has been written exactly as God has narrated; thus, there
can be no discrepancy in it. Moreover, they are prescribed in such a
way that they are easy to observe. Therefore, if one observes too
much or too little, one will certainly become unhappy.

8

“So, only one who follows the commands of the Satpurush can be
said to be under the influence of favourable circumstances. To
deviate from those commands is the very definition of adverse
circumstances. Therefore, only one who follows the commands of the
Satpurush is behaving as the ãtmã.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-51 || 184 ||

Gadhadã II-52
What Befits a Renunciant and
What Befits a Householder
1

On Chaitra vadi 11, Samvat 1880 [24 April 1824], Shriji
Mahãrãj arrived at Lakshmivãdi on horseback from Dãdã Khãchar’s
darbãr in Gadhadã. There, He sat on a square platform and was
dressed entirely in white clothes. He was also wearing a garland of
flowers around His neck, and a tassel of flowers decorated His pãgh.
At that time, some munis were singing devotional songs to the
accompaniment of a jhãnjh and mrudang, while other munis as well
as devotees from various places had gathered before Him in an
assembly.

2

After the munis had finished singing, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “I
wish to speak now, so please listen. In this world, the path of a
renunciant and the path of a householder are both different. That
The Vachanãmrut

457

which befits a householder is not appropriate for a renunciant, and
that which befits a renunciant is not appropriate for a householder.
One who is wise will realise this, but others will not.
3

“Now, I shall explain the distinctions. Wealth and property;
elephants and horses; cows and buffaloes; houses and mansions; a
wife and children; lavish clothes and jewellery are all befitting for a
householder.
But for a renunciant, they are completely
inappropriate. For a renunciant, to live in the forest; to keep no
clothes except a loincloth; to wear a cap on one’s head; to shave off
one’s hair, beard and moustache; to wear saffron-coloured clothes;
and to tolerate someone swearing or throwing dust at one are most
befitting. But these, although befitting for a renunciant, are in fact
inappropriate for a householder. Thus, one who has renounced the
world and become a renunciant should think, ‘Which ãshram do I
belong to?’ A wise person should think about this; he should not
stray onto some inappropriate path like a fool.

4

“Moreover, if a wise person is scolded by someone, he would in
turn consider the scolder’s virtues; on the other hand, if someone
offers some useful advice to a fool, the fool would be offended. In that
respect, Mulji Brahmachãri and Ratanji are never offended; that is
why I get along very well with them.

5

“Also, I like one who serves with shraddhã. Conversely, if
someone who does not have shraddhã were to bring Me a meal, I
would not like the food; or if they were to bring some clothes, I would
not like to wear them; or if they were to perform My puja, I would not
like that puja. If, however, one offers something with shraddhã, I
like it very much.

6

“Furthermore, even if one offers bhakti with shraddhã, if one
becomes jealous of someone else who comes to offer their bhakti, then
I do not like that. Thus, I very much prefer one who offers bhakti
with shraddhã and without jealousy.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-52 || 185 ||

The Vachanãmrut

458

Gadhadã II-53
Not Being Able to Perceive One’s Own Flaws
Is Delusion
1

On Vaishãkh sudi 5, Samvat 1880 [3 May 1824], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting upon a cushion with a cylindrical
pillow in His residence in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He
was dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, an assembly of
munis as well as devotees from various places had gathered before
Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “The characteristic of delusion
as described in the scriptures is as follows: When delusion pervades
one’s heart, one simply cannot perceive one’s own flaws. Thus, not
being able to perceive one’s own flaws is, in fact, the very definition of
delusion.

3

“Moreover, everyone has extreme vanity of the wisdom that they
possess, but they do not think, ‘I do not even know anything about
my own jiva’ – that is, is the jiva within this body black, or is it
white? Is it long, or is it short? They know nothing about their own
jiva, yet they find faults in the great Purush or in God. They feel,
‘Although He is a great Purush or God, this much He is not doing
properly.’ Though they find faults in this way, little do the fools
realise that God sees all of the jivas and ishwars who dwell in the
countless millions of brahmãnds as clearly as He sees a drop of water
in His palm. He is also the supporter of countless millions of
brahmãnds; He is the husband of Lakshmi; and He is the creator,
sustainer and destroyer of countless millions of brahmãnds. Even
Shesh, Shãradã, Brahmã and other deities are unable to fathom the
extent of His greatness. In fact, even the Vedas describe His glory as
‘ŸÁÃ ŸÁÃ’i . Therefore, a person who perceives faults either in God’s
divine incidents or in His understanding should be known to be a
non-believer and a sinner. In fact, he should be considered to be the
king of all fools. Besides, God’s and His Bhakta’s understanding

i neti neti

Literally meaning ‘Not this much; not this much;’ implying that the glory of God
is unparalleled, i.e. indescribable and unfathomable.

The Vachanãmrut

459

transcends this world. How, then, can a person who believes his self
to be the body possibly comprehend it?
4

“So, it is simply out of one’s foolishness that one perceives flaws
in God and His Bhakta and thus falls from the path of God; but,
God’s true Bhakta, the Satpurush, continues to act in a
transcendental way.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-53 || 186 ||

Gadhadã II-54
Satsang Is the Greatest Spiritual Endeavour;
A ‘Gokhar’i; Profound Attachment
1

In the afternoon on Jyeshtha sudi 7, Samvat 1880 [3 June 1824],
Swãmi Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj arrived at Lakshmivãdi on
horseback from Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. There, after
riding the horse for quite some time, He sat down on a square
platform. He was dressed entirely in white clothes. He had also tied
a black-bordered cloth around His head. In addition to this, His neck
was adorned with a garland of mogrã flowers, and His pãgh was
decorated with a tassel of flowers. At that time, an assembly of
munis as well as devotees from various places had gathered before
Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj asked the munis, “In the 12th chapter
of the 11th canto of the Shrimad Bhãgwat, Shri Krishna Bhagwãn
has said to Uddhav, ‘I am not as pleased by ashtãng-yoga, sãnkhya,
renunciation, observances, sacrifices, austerities, donations,
pilgrimages, etc., as I am pleased by satsang.’ This is what God has
said. This implies that of all spiritual endeavours, satsang is the
greatest. But what are the characteristics of one who regards
satsang as the greatest spiritual endeavour?”

3

The munis answered according to their understanding, but none
could give a precise answer.

4

So Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “One who regards satsang as the
greatest spiritual endeavour is profoundly attached only to the Sant

i A wild donkey.

The Vachanãmrut

460

of God. For example, if a king who is childless receives a son in old
age, then even if that son swears at the king or misbehaves, for
example, by pulling his moustache, the king would not find faults in
him. Even if the son hits another child or causes problems in the
village, still the king would never attribute faults to his child. Why?
Because the king is profoundly attached to his son. Likewise, only
one who develops such profound attachment for the Bhakta of God
has realised satsang to be the most redemptive of all spiritual
endeavours. This fact has been described in the Shrimad Bhãgwat:

ÿSÿÊà◊’ÈÁh— ∑È§áÊ¬ ÁòÊœÊÃÈ∑§ SflœË— ∑§‹òÊÊÁŒ·È ÷ı◊ ßÖÿœË—–
ÿ?ÊËÕ¸’ÈÁh— ‚Á‹‹ Ÿ ∑§Á„¸UÁøîÊŸcflÁ÷ôÊ·È ‚ ∞fl ªÙπ⁄U—H i
Indeed, this verse has stated that fact appropriately.”
|| Vachanãmrut II-54 || 187 ||

Gadhadã II-55
A Goldsmith’s Workshop
1

On Jyeshtha sudi 11, Samvat 1880 [7 June 1824], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot on the
veranda outside the east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in
Gadhadã.
He had tied a golden-bordered, white moliyu from
Navãnagar around His head. He was wearing a white khes and had
covered Himself with a white blanket. At that time, while some
munis were singing devotional songs to the accompaniment of a

i

Yasyãtma-buddhihi kunape tri-dhãtuke swadheehee kalatrãdishu bhauma
ijyadheehee|
Yat-teertha-buddhihi
salile
na
karhichij-janeshvabhigneshu
sa
eva
gokharaha||
He who regards the body – composed of the three constituents [i.e. vãt (gas),
pitta (biles) and kaf (phlegm)] – to be his own self; regards his wife and children
to be his own; regards the [murtis of God made from] earth to be venerable; and
regards water to be [sacred like] a place of pilgrimage – but does not regard the
enlightened devotees [of God] to be [these, i.e. one’s own self, one’s own,
venerable and sacred], then he is the most despicable of all animals, a wild
donkey.
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 10.84.13

The Vachanãmrut

461

jhãnjh and mrudang, other munis as well as devotees from various
places had gathered before Him in an assembly.
2

After the munis had finished singing devotional songs, Shriji
Mahãrãj said, “Just as one possesses some sort of inclination today,
one must also have had some trace of it before joining the Satsang
fellowship. Therefore today, I would like all of you to describe
whatever type of inclination you have. To begin, I shall describe the
type of inclination I have, so please listen.

3

“Even when I was a child, I very much enjoyed such things as
going to mandirs for darshan, listening to spiritual discourses,
keeping the company of sãdhus, and going on pilgrimages. Then,
when I renounced My home, I did not even like to keep clothes. In
fact, I liked to stay only in the forest, but I was not the least bit
afraid. Even when I came across large snakes, lions, elephants, and
countless other types of animals in the forest, there was not the
slightest fear of dying in My heart. In this way, I always remained
fearless in the dense forest. Thereafter, after travelling to holy places
of pilgrimage, I met Rãmãnand Swãmi. Only after Rãmãnand
Swãmi passed away did I begin to keep a little fear – that too, for the
sake of Satsang.

4

“However, the following thought is constantly in My mind:
When a person is laid down on his death-bed with death impending,
everyone loses their self-interest in that person. The mind of the
person who is dying also becomes dejected from worldly life. In the
same way, I also constantly feel as if death is imminent at this
moment for Myself as well as for others. In fact, I constantly regard
each and every worldly object to be perishable and insignificant.
Never do I make any distinctions such as, ‘This is a nice object, and
this is a bad object.’ Instead, all worldly objects appear the same to
Me. For example, when considering the hairs of the armpit, which
can be considered good and which bad? Indeed, good or bad, they are
all the same. Similarly, all worldly objects appear the same to Me.

5

“If I do compliment or criticise something, it is only to please the
devotees of God. When I say such things as, ‘This is delicious food’,
or ‘These are nice clothes’, or ‘This is a beautiful ornament’, or ‘This
is a pleasant house’, or ‘This is a fine horse’, or ‘This is a beautiful
flower’, it is only to please that particular devotee. In fact, all of My
activities are for the sake of the devotees of God; there is not a single
activity which I perform for My own personal enjoyment.”
The Vachanãmrut

462

6

Shriji Mahãrãj then said, “The mind of an ekãntik bhakta of God
contemplates only upon the form of God; his mouth sings only the
praises of God; his hands engage only in the service of God and His
devotees; and his ears listen only to the praises of God. In this way, I
am able to perform all My activities only after realising them to be a
form of bhakti to God. Besides the bhakti of God, My mind is
indifferent to everything else. For example, if the only son of a king
dies when the king reaches the age of 60 or 70, the king would
become disinterested in all things. In the same manner, I constantly
remain disinterested – while eating, drinking, mounting a horse and
even when I am pleased or displeased.

7

“In addition, a thought also remains within My heart that I am
the ãtmã, distinct from the body; I am not like this body. Also, My
mind is always cautious, lest a portion of mãyã in the form of
rajogun, tamogun, etc. infiltrate My ãtmã! In fact, I am constantly
vigilant of that.

8

“Now, consider the following analogy of a goldsmith’s workshop:
If a person takes some pure, 24-carat gold to a goldsmith’s workshop,
but takes his eyes off of it for even a moment, the goldsmith will
extract some of the gold and alloy some silver in its place. Similarly,
consider the goldsmith’s workshop to be the heart and the goldsmith
to be mãyã. While the goldsmith is sitting within his workshop – the
heart – he is continuously hammering away with his hammer of
desires. Even his wife and children secretly steal some gold if they
can get their hands on it. Consider the indriyas and antahkaran to
be the wife and children of mãyã – the goldsmith; after all, it is they
who add silver – i.e., the three gunas, attachment to the
panchvishays, the belief that one is the body and that one has lust,
anger, avarice, etc. – into the chaitanya, i.e., the gold. Not only that,
but they also extract some gold in the form of the virtues of gnãn,
vairãgya, etc.

9

“When some gold is extracted and silver is mixed in its place, the
original gold diminishes in purity to become 18-carat gold. Only if it
is melted down can it be purified again. Thus, the silver of rajogun,
tamogun, etc., which has been mixed into the jiva should be filtered
out. Thereafter, the pure ãtmã – the gold – will remain, and no other
impurities of mãyã will be left. This is the thought in which I
remain engrossed, day and night.

The Vachanãmrut

463

10

“I have thus described My inclination to you. Now, in the same
manner, please describe your inclinations to Me.”

11

Thereupon the sãdhus said, “Mahãrãj, in no way can there be
any impurities of mãyã in You, for You are divine. The discourse
You have just delivered, in fact, describes our inclinations. Also, the
thought that You mentioned is actually what all of us should
cultivate in our lives.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-55 || 188 ||

Gadhadã II-56
A Lightly Dyed Cloth
1

On Ãshãdh sudi 5, Samvat 1881 [1 July 1824], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a cushion with a cylindrical
pillow that had been placed on a large, decorated cot on the veranda
outside the east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.
He was dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, some sãdhus
were singing devotional songs to the accompaniment of a dukad and
sarodã, while munis as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him in an assembly.

2

After the singing had finished, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Upon
hearing these devotional songs, My ãtmã delved into deep thought,
from which I have concluded that profound love for God is indeed a
great thing. I then remembered Gopãlãnand Swãmi and all of the
devotees who have such love for God, and in all of their antahkarans
and jivas I could see their love towards God. Thereafter, I examined
My own ãtmã, and it appeared to Me that others do not seem to have
as much love for God as I do. After all, if they were to encounter
adverse circumstances, then even though they are great, their mind
would at least be slightly affected. Thus I felt that ultimately their
foundation appears to be weak. In fact, if they were to encounter
extremely adverse circumstances, their love for God would not
remain stable at all.

3

“So after examining everyone, it seems to Me that My position is
better, in the sense that regardless of the extent of adverse
circumstances that I may encounter, in no way will My antahkaran
ever be affected.”

The Vachanãmrut

464

4

Continuing, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Only his love for God is true
who never develops love for anything other than God. In fact, the
essence of all scriptures is simply this: God is the sole source of
eternal bliss and the supreme essence of everything. Excluding God,
all other objects are absolutely worthless and totally unsubstantial.

5

“If a person does have as much love for other objects as he does
for God, then his foundation is indeed very weak. Consider the
analogy of a piece of lightly dyed cloth. It may look very nice
initially, but if water happens to fall on it, and it is then put out to
dry in the sun, then it becomes utterly useless. So much so, that it
would not even remain like a white piece of cloth. In the same way,
then, when a person who has affection for the panchvishays
encounters evil company, one can never be certain about him.

6

“Thus, to please God, a devotee should totally discard the
panchvishays. He should also abandon any affection for objects
which may hinder his love for God.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-56 || 189 ||

Gadhadã II-57
The Example of a Lizard; A ‘Cat-like’ Devotee
1

During the evening ãrti on Ãshãdh sudi 6, Samvat 1881 [2 July
1824], Swãmi Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large,
decorated cot on the veranda outside the east-facing rooms of Dãdã
Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. A white pãgh with tassels made of
flowers had been tied around His head. He was wearing a white khes
and had covered Himself with a white cotton cloth. At that time,
some munis were singing devotional songs to the accompaniment of a
sarodã, while paramhansas as well as devotees from various places
had gathered before Him in an assembly. A few torches were also lit
at that time.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Please listen, I wish to speak to
all of you. When you were singing devotional songs, and as I was
listening to them, a thought occurred to Me, which I shall now share
with you. If one wants to love God, one should love Him while
believing oneself to be the ãtmã, which is characterised by pure
existence. What is that ãtmã like? Well, within it there are no
hindrances either of mãyã or the entities evolved from mãyã, i.e., the
The Vachanãmrut

465

three gunas, the body, the indriyas and the antahkaran. Whatever
hindrances do seem to be in the ãtmã are, in fact, due to ignorance.
But no hindrances of any form remain in one who has totally
dispelled them through gnãn and vairãgya. However, to behave as
the ãtmã does not mean to believe oneself to be Brahma and act
waywardly. Rather, the purpose of behaving as the ãtmã is to
realise, ‘I am the ãtmã, and there are no hindrances of mãyã within
me. If that is so, how can there be even the slightest trace of mãyã
in Paramãtmã Nãrãyan Vãsudev, who transcends the ãtmã?’ For
this reason then, the virtue of ãtmã-realisation should be firmly
cultivated so that in no way does one perceive any fault in God.
3

“Then keeping one’s thought in the midst of the light of the
ãtmã, one should destroy anything that tries to disturb his behaving
as the ãtmã. For example, when a lizard comes near the light of an
oil lamp, it kills any insect that comes near the light. In the same
way, the thought that rests within the light of the ãtmã destroys
everything apart from the ãtmã.

4

“Furthermore, if a person truly loves God, he would never
develop love for anything else. If there is an object that appears to be
dearer to him than God, he would completely discard it. That is true
renunciation. Indeed, he would discard that object irrespective of
whether it is a significant object or an insignificant object – after all,
only that is called renunciation. If, on the other hand, a person can
outwardly renounce many other things but cannot discard an object
that hinders him in worshipping God, his renunciation is useless.

5

“Also, do not think that only alluring objects obstruct one’s
worship of God and insignificant objects do not. After all, the very
nature of the jiva is such that some people prefer sweet items, some
prefer salty items, some prefer sour items, whereas some prefer bitter
items. Thus, it is the petty mentality of the jiva that it keeps even
the most insignificant of objects dearer to it than God. But when one
considers the greatness of God, no such object can compare to even a
millionth of a fraction of His greatness.

6

“If a person has developed affection for God having thoroughly
realised God in this way, he would not develop affection towards any
worldly object, i.e., the body, the brahmãnd, etc. Instead, all worldly
objects would become insignificant to him. After all, it was when
King Chitraketu thoroughly realised the greatness of God that he
renounced his ten million wives. He even renounced his empire,
The Vachanãmrut

466

which spanned across the entire country. In fact, he ultimately
realised, ‘Of what value is the pleasure of ten million women before
the bliss of God? Also, of what value are the pleasures of an empire
spanning the entire country? Indeed, of what value are the pleasures
of the realm of Indra and the realm of Brahmã?’
7

“In contrast, one who has affection for some object other than
such a great God possesses an utterly petty mentality. Just as a dog
derives pleasure from taking a dry bone to some isolated place and
then licking it, in the same way, a foolish person believes that there
are pleasures in such miseries and thus develops affection for
worthless objects. If a so-called devotee of God does have more
affection for some object than he has for God, then he is nothing but a
‘cat-like’ i devotee. A true devotee of God, on the other hand, would
definitely not hold anything dearer to him than God.”

8

Shriji Mahãrãj then said, “A devotee of God who possesses gnãn,
vairãgya, bhakti and dharma realises, ‘One who is brave and who
walks boldly towards his enemy at the time of battle is indeed truly
valiant. Conversely, it is futile when one who is brave is not utilised
in battle, just like wealth that is not spent. Similarly, since I have
attained God, if I do not talk about liberation to those who keep my
company, then of what use is my gnãn?’ Bearing this in mind, he
would not harbour any cowardice in talking about God – even if some
opposition were to arise regarding his preaching.”

9

Having said this, Shriji Mahãrãj had three verses written by
Tulsidãs sung. Those three verses were: ‘ÖÿÊÁ∑§ ◊Ò ‹ªŸ ⁄UÊ◊‚Ù¥ ŸÊÁ„U¥...’ii ,
‘∞„UË ∑§sÔÙ ‚ÈŸÈ flŒ ø„È¢U...’iii and ‘ÖÿÊ∑È§¢ Á¬˝ÿ Ÿ ⁄UÊ◊ flÒŒ„U Ë …’iv.

10

Shriji Mahãrãj then added, “We should live according to the
words mentioned in these verses.
While doing so, if some
insufficiency remains, and if one were to die at that time, one will
still not enter the cycle of births and deaths, nor will one become a
ghost. In fact, at the very worst, one will join the ranks of Indra or

i The term ‘cat-like’ used here means ‘deceitful’.
ii Jyãki lagan Rãmso nãhi…
iii Ehi kahyo sunu Veda chahu…
iv Jyãku priya na Rãm Vaidehi…

The Vachanãmrut

467

Brahmã; one’s fate will not be any worse than that. Thus, one
should fearlessly engage in the worship of God.”
11

At that point, Mulji Brahmachãri came to call Shriji Mahãrãj
for His meals, and they both left the assembly together.
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-57 || 190 ||

Gadhadã II-58
The Flourishing of a Sampradãy
1

On Shrãvan sudi 4, Samvat 1881 [29 July 1824], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a cushion with a cylindrical
pillow that had been placed on a large, decorated cot on the veranda
outside the east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.
He was dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, an assembly
of munis as well as devotees from various places had gathered before
Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj asked, “How do the sampradãys of
the great ãchãryas flourish for a long period of time?”

3

Muktãnand Swãmi answered, “Firstly, by the scriptures of the
sampradãy; secondly, by the observance of the dharma of one’s caste
and ãshram as prescribed in the scriptures; and thirdly, by total
conviction in one’s Ishtadev. One’s sampradãy flourishes by these
three factors.”

4

Shriji Mahãrãj then asked the same question to Brahmãnand
Swãmi and Nityãnand Swãmi. They also gave the same reply.

5

Thereafter, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Here, allow Me to answer the
question. A sampradãy flourishes by knowing the following: The
purpose for which the Ishtadev of the sampradãy manifested on
earth; and after manifesting, the various divine actions He
performed, as well as the ways in which He behaved. Through His
behaviour, dharma as well as the greatness of that Ishtadev is
naturally revealed. In this manner, then, a sampradãy fostered by
the scriptures which narrate its Ishtadev’s divine incidents from His
birth up until His passing away. Regardless of whether those
scriptures are in Sanskrit or in the vernacular, only those scriptures
will foster the sampradãy, not others.

The Vachanãmrut

468

6

“For example, those who worship Rãmchandra Bhagwãn will be
inspired only by the Vãlmiki Rãmãyan; and those who worship Shri
Krishna Bhagwãn will be inspired only by the tenth and eleventh
cantos of the Shrimad Bhãgwat. The Vedas will not inspire those
who worship Rãmchandraji Bhagwãn or Shri Krishna Bhagwãn.
Ultimately, then, only the scriptures of one’s own sampradãy will
foster the sampradãy.”

7

Having said this, Shriji Mahãrãj then commanded Muktãnand
Swãmi: “You too should continuously preach and write scriptures
related to your sampradãy and your Ishtadev for the rest of your life.
This is My only command to you for as long as you live.”

8

With great respect for these words of Shriji Mahãrãj,
Muktãnand Swãmi resolved to devoutly abide by them. Then, folding
his hands, he bowed before Shriji Mahãrãj.
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-58 || 191 ||

Gadhadã II-59
Ultimate Liberation
1

On Shrãvan sudi 12, Samvat 1881 [6 August 1824], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot on the
veranda outside the mandir of Shri Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã
Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white
clothes. At that time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees from
various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “In the four Vedas, the Purãns
and the Itihãs scriptures, there is but one central principle, and that
is that only God and His Sant can grant liberation. In fact, God’s
Sant is greater than even Bhava, Brahmã, and the other deities. So,
when one attains God or His Sant, then, apart from this, there is no
other liberation for the jiva; this itself is ultimate liberation.

3

“Furthermore, only those who have accumulated a great number
of merits from performing good deeds receive the opportunity to serve
God’s Sant, but those who have a few merits do not. So, one should
develop affection for God’s Sant just as one has affection for one’s
wife, son, parents or brother. Due to this affection, then, the jiva
becomes absolutely fulfilled.
The Vachanãmrut

469

4

“Moreover, even if one’s wife, son or other family members are
unworthy, and even if they are immoral and vile, in no way would
one perceive flaws in them. Conversely, even if the Bhakta of God
possesses every noble virtue, if he were to utter even a few harsh
words, then one would hold a grudge against him for as long as one
lives. If a person has such an attitude, then in no way can he be said
to have as much affection for the Bhakta of God as he does for his
relatives. Consequently, he would not attain liberation.

5

“Furthermore, the greatness of the Sant is indeed as much as I
mentioned earlier. Yet, even after attaining God and His Sant, some
people still harbour the doubt, ‘Will I attain liberation or not?’ What
can be the reason for this? Well, in his past lives, that person had
not attained God or His Sant, nor had he served them. Thus, this is
a new experience for him, which will bear fruit in his subsequent
lives. If, on the other hand, a person had attained God and His Sant
and had served them in his past lives, then in this life, his affection
for the Bhakta of God would never diminish. Nor would he waver in
his faith. Even if his disturbing thoughts related to lust, anger or
avarice persisted, his faith in God would not dissolve. What can be
said, then, about his faith not faltering due to some other person’s
influence? In fact, even if his own mind were to try to sway him
from his faith, he would still not be swayed. Such a person’s resolve
can be said to be like that of Nãth Bhakta’s and like Vishnudãs’s,
Himrãj Shãh’s and Bhãlchandra Sheth’s was, and like Kãshidãs’s
and Dãmodar’s is. When a person possesses such resolve, it should
be known that this person has been a devotee of God in a past life.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-59 || 192 ||

Gadhadã II-60
Overcoming Difficulties; Being Loyal
1

On Shrãvan vadi 4, Samvat 1881 [13 August 1824], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot in the
eastern veranda outside the west-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s
darbãr in Gadhadã. He was wearing a white khes and had tied a
white pãgh around His head. He had also covered Himself with a
white blanket. At that time, an assembly of paramhansas as well as
devotees from various places had gathered before Him.
The Vachanãmrut

470

2

Then Shriji Mahãrãj requested, “Please begin a question-answer
session.”

3

Thereupon Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, life is full of
difficulties. Amidst all these difficulties, what understanding should
a devotee of God cultivate in order to remain happy at heart?”

4

Shriji Mahãrãj began, “To answer that, I shall tell you about My
own experience.” He then explained, “By keeping the following three
forms of awareness, I am not hindered by any disturbances: constant
awareness of the ãtmã, which is distinct from the body; the
awareness of the perishable nature of all worldly objects; and the
awareness of God’s greatness. By keeping these three forms of
awareness, no difficulties hinder Me in any way.

5

“If, however, one does encounter some difficulties, then due to
the nature of the chitt, it may appear that there is some disturbance.
However, the effect of that disturbance does not penetrate into the
chaitanya.
This can be realised by the fact that one never
experiences disturbances that are occurring externally when one is
dreaming. On the other hand, if a disturbance has penetrated into
the chaitanya, it is experienced in all three states7. Therefore,
because I do not experience any disturbances in My dreams, it can be
inferred that no disturbances have affected My chaitanya in any way.

6

“Having said this though, if a devotee of God encounters some
sort of distressing hardship, it is not as if I do not realise it; I very
much do feel it in My heart. Only a non-believer like Raghunãthdãs
would not feel it. For when Rãmãnand Swãmi passed away, all of the
satsangis began to cry, but Raghunãthdãs was not at all grieved.
Instead, he wandered around, laughing and talking to others. Thus,
only an outcast or a non-believer would not feel hurt when a devotee
of God encounters some sort of misery, but a devotee of God would
definitely become distressed by the suffering of other devotees.”

7

Continuing, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “The scriptures state that if a
devotee of God is being killed or harassed by someone, then he who
stands in defence of that devotee of God – and in doing so dies or
becomes wounded himself – is totally freed from the five grave sins10,
i.e., killing a Brãhmin, etc. Such is the glory of defending a devotee
of God. However, if one is hurt by the words of devotees of God – as if
one has been shot in the heart by some arrows – and if a grudge
develops from that hatred to such an extent that it is not resolved as
long as one lives, then such a person is like an outcast. Even if such
The Vachanãmrut

471

a person possesses virtues such as dharma and renunciation or
performs austerities, it is all worthless.
In fact, even if he
endeavours in a million other ways, his jiva will not attain liberation.
8

“In society, if a woman bears equal affection for her husband as
she does for another man, then she is looked upon as being immoral –
like a prostitute. Similarly, if a person in this world believes, ‘As far
as I am concerned, all sãdhus are equal. Who is good and who is
bad?’ – then even if he is considered to be a satsangi, he should be
known to be a non-believer. In addition, in case a person feels, ‘If I
say something inappropriate, my own friends will condemn me,’ and
so to preserve his respect, the person listens as someone speaks ill of
a devotee of God – then he should also be known to be a non-believer,
even though he may be considered to be a satsangi.

9

“Therefore, one should be absolutely loyal to a devotee of God –
just as one is loyal to one’s relatives and one’s mother and father. If
ever some sort of difficulty does happen to arise with a devotee of God,
only one who does not develop a grudge, but settles the difference and
reunites with that devotee – like a line drawn in water – can be
called a true a devotee of God.”

10

Having said this, Shriji Mahãrãj finally added, “I am very
compassionate – like Dattãtreya, Jadbharat, Nãrad and Shukji. In
fact, once while I was travelling in the east, I came across a band of
ascetics. They ordered me: ‘Go and pick some green spinach.’ I
replied, ‘I will not pick it, because it too contains a jiva.’ Hearing
this, one of them drew a sword and threatened Me. Nevertheless, I
did not pick the spinach. This is the extent of My compassionate
nature. However, if one looks angrily at a devotee of God, then even
if that person is a relative of Mine, I feel like tearing his eyes out; and
if he should hurt a devotee of God with his hands, I feel like cutting
his hands off. Such is the aversion I experience; in those cases, I do
not show any compassion. Only one who has such loyalty for a
devotee of God can be called a full-fledged devotee of God.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-60 || 193 ||

The Vachanãmrut

472

Gadhadã II-61
Niyams, Faith in God, and Loyalty
1

On Shrãvan vadi 7, Samvat 1881 [17 August 1825], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot in the
eastern veranda outside the west-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s
darbãr in Gadhadã. He had tied a golden-bordered, white shelu
around His head and had covered Himself with another white shelu.
He was also wearing a white khes and a garland of mogrã flowers.
At that time, an assembly of paramhansas as well as devotees from
various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “A person who possesses three
attributes can be called a staunch satsangi. What are these three
attributes? The first is to strictly adhere to the niyams prescribed by
one’s Ishtadev – to such an extent that one would never forsake those
disciplines even at the cost of one’s life. The second is to have
extremely firm faith in God, so much so that one would never sway
from it even if others or one’s own mind were to raise doubts. The
third is to be loyal to those Vaishnav devotees who worship one’s
Ishtadev – just as parents are loyal to their children, a son is loyal to
his father, and a wife is loyal to her husband. One who possesses
these three attributes completely can be called a staunch satsangi.”

3

Then continuing, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “When someone comes
and sits at the front of an assembly of devotees, others think, ‘This
person must be a great satsangi.’ However, the test of a great
satsangi is as follows: If he is a householder, he would surrender
everything he has for God and His devotees; and if required to do so,
would even give his life for Satsang; and the moment his Ishtadev
commands him to become a paramhansa, he would immediately
become a paramhansa.
If a devotee of God possesses these
characteristics, then whether he sits at the front of an assembly of
devotees, or at the back – he should be considered to be great
amongst all devotees.
Moreover, a renunciant who, despite
encountering wealth and women in his travels to other regions,
remains unaffected and continues to firmly adhere to all of his
niyams, is considered to be great amongst all renunciants.

4

“Of course, if a sensuous person considered to be reputable in
society comes to an assembly, then he should be respected
accordingly and given a seat at the very front of the assembly. Such
The Vachanãmrut

473

etiquette should be observed by persons possessing gnãn as well as by
renunciants.
If they do not, then the consequences can be
detrimental. Consider the example of when King Parikshit went to
the rishi’s hermitage. The rishi happened to be in samãdhi and so
the king was not honoured. As a result, the king became angry and
threw a dead snake around the rishi’s neck. Thereafter, the rishi’s
son cursed the king, leading to the king’s death seven days later.
5

“There is also the example of when Daksha prajãpati visited
Brahmã’s assembly. There, Shivji neither stood up for Daksha
prajãpati, nor welcomed him verbally, thus upsetting Daksha. He
then cancelled Shiv’s share in the sacrifice he performed. Thereafter,
Nandishwar and Bhrugu cursed each other; because of that sin, Sati
burnt to death in Daksha’s sacrifice. This prompted Virbhadra to cut
off Daksha’s head and offer it in the fire, which resulted in Daksha
receiving the head of a goat.

6

“Therefore, all of you householders and renunciants should abide
by the following practice: Those who are considered to be respectable
in society and worldly affairs should in no way be insulted in an
assembly. If they are dishonoured, it will definitely lead to problems
and create hindrances in worship. For this reason, then, all satsangi
householders and renunciants should firmly abide by this principle of
Mine.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-61 || 194 ||

Gadhadã II-62
Ãtmã-Realisation, Fidelity and Servitude
1

On Mãgshar sudi 2, Samvat 1881 [22 November 1824], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot on
the veranda outside the north-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr
in Gadhadã. He was wearing a white khes and had tied a white pãgh
around His head. Also, He had covered Himself with a thick, white
cotton cloth. At that time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees
from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Shriji Mahãrãj then summoned His nephews, Ayodhyãprasãdji
and Raghuvirji, and said to them, “You may ask Me questions.”

3

Thereupon Ayodhyãprasãdji first asked, “In life, a man may be
engrossed in the entanglements of worldly affairs all day long, and
The Vachanãmrut

474

during that time, he may well perform some pious as well as impious
karmas. Moreover, he may engage in worship for only half an hour
or so. Is this enough to burn all of the sins he has committed during
the day, or not? That is my question.”
4

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “Even if a person has spent the whole
day in pravrutti, and regardless of whatever type of activities he may
have been involved in, if, when he engages in the worship of God, his
indriyas, antahkaran and jiva all unite and become engrossed in
worship, then even if he does so for half an hour, or even for a few
minutes, all of his sins will be burnt to ashes. However, if his
indriyas, antahkaran and jiva do not unitedly engage in worship,
then his sins cannot be burned by worshipping for such a short
while. Such a person can attain liberation only by the grace of God.
This is the answer to the question.”

5

Next, Raghuvirji asked a question, “Mahãrãj, what must one do
for the liberation of the jiva?”

6

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “If a person aspires for liberation, he
should place his body, wealth, home, family and relations in the
service of God. Furthermore, he should shun any object that may
not be of use in serving God. One who lives such a God-centred life
joins the ranks of Nãrad and the Sanakãdik in the abode of God and
attains ultimate liberation after he dies, even if he is a householder.
This is the answer to your question.”

7

Having answered their questions, Shriji Mahãrãj then began of
His own accord, “Since the day I began pondering over it, I have
noticed that there are three inclinations which lead to liberation and
which lead to extreme bliss. Of these, one is profound ãtmãrealisation, which is to believe one’s true self to be the ãtmã and
engage in the worship of God, like Shukji. The second is the
inclination of a woman who observes the vow of fidelity, which is to
worship God as if He is one’s husband, just as the gopis did. The
third is the inclination of servitude, which is to worship God as His
servant, just like Hanumãnji and Uddhavji. Without these three
inclinations, there is no way in which the jiva can attain liberation.
In fact, I, Myself, have firmly cultivated all three of these
inclinations. Even if a person possesses one of these inclinations
firmly, he becomes absolutely fulfilled.

8

“I shall now describe the attributes of these three inclinations
individually. Firstly, the following are the attributes of one who has
The Vachanãmrut

475

realised the ãtmã. On one side there is the ãtmã and on the other
side is the horde of mãyã – the body, the indriyas, the antahkaran,
the three gunas, the panchvishays, etc. The thought that rests
between the two is full of gnãn. This thought remains steady, just as
the tip of a flame remains steady in the absence of wind. It is this
thought which prevents the body, indriyas and antahkaran from
becoming one with the ãtmã. In fact, even the thought itself does not
become one with the ãtmã.
9

“When the jiva attains this thought, its vruttis, which once
reached all the way to Kãshi, recede to reach only as far as Vartãl.
When that thought is consolidated, the vruttis then recede from
Vartãl to reach only as far as Gadhadã. Then, from reaching as far
as Gadhadã, they recede and come into the vicinity of the body.
From the body, the vruttis recede further and rest in the organs of
the indriyas. From the organs of the indriyas, the indriyas’ vruttis
turn inward towards the antahkaran. Finally, the vruttis of the
indriyas and antahkaran become absorbed in the ãtmã. It is then
that the jiva’s kãran body, which is full of worldly desires, is said to
be destroyed.

10

“Furthermore, when this thought meets with the ãtmã, divine
light is generated in the heart of the thinker, and he has the
realisation of himself as being brahmarup. In addition, he also has
the realisation of Parabrahma Nãrãyan – who resides within that
Brahmai . One who has this realisation feels, ‘I am the ãtmã, and
Paramãtmã eternally resides within me.’ Such a sustained state is
the highest level of ãtmã-realisation.

11

“Secondly, the inclination of a person who has fidelity should be
like that of the gopis of Vraj. For example, from the day the gopis
touched the holy feet of Shri Krishna Bhagwãn, all of the pleasures of
this world became like poison to them. In this way, if a faithful wife
who has the inclination of fidelity sees a man who is as handsome as
Indra, or who is like a deity or some king, then – just as when one
sees a rotting dog or some excretion one becomes extremely disgusted
and looks away – she would withdraw her eyes. This is the highest
form of fidelity. Therefore, if one attaches one’s vruttis to God just as

i Here ‘Brahma’ should be understood to mean ‘brahmarup ãtmã’.

The Vachanãmrut

476

a faithful wife does with her husband, one’s mind would never
become pleased upon seeing anyone else.
12

“Thirdly, a person who has an inclination of offering bhakti with
servitude would like the darshan only of his Ishtadev; he would like
to hear talks only about Him; he would like His Ishtadev’s nature;
and he would also prefer to stay only with Him. Nevertheless, even
though he has such love, for the sake of serving his Ishtadev and
earning His pleasure, he wishes day and night, ‘If my Ishtadev were
to command me, I would follow that command most happily.’ If his
Ishtadev were to give a command that would force him to stay far
away, he would stay there happily, but in no way would he be
disheartened. In fact, he finds supreme bliss in following the
command itself. This is the highest level of servitude. Today,
Gopãlãnand Swãmi and also Muktãnand Swãmi have such an
inclination of offering bhakti with servitude.

13

“Among the devotees of God who possess one of these three
inclinations, there exist three levels – the highest, the intermediate
and the lowest. Those who are not found in any one of these
categories can only be called wretched. Thus, it is only proper to die
after one has thoroughly cultivated one of the three inclinations; it is
not appropriate to die if one has not completely developed any single
one of the three. Instead, it would be better if a person lives five days
longer to dispel his misunderstandings and consolidate at least one of
these three inclinations, and die thereafter.”

14

Continuing, Shriji Mahãrãj added, “The nature of the jiva is
such that when a person is a householder, he would prefer to
renounce worldly life; but once he has renounced, he harbours desires
for the pleasures of worldly life once again. Such is the perverse
nature of the jiva. Therefore, one who is a staunch devotee of God
should worship God after discarding such a perverse nature as well
as all of one’s personal likes and dislikes. Moreover, it is only
appropriate to die after eradicating all desires other than those of
God.

15

“If, however, one does not have intense love for God, one should
strengthen only ãtmã-realisation by thought. Why? Because a
devotee of God should either possess resolute ãtmã-realisation or
extremely profound love for God. If a person is not firm in either one
of these two inclinations, he should strictly abide by the niyams of
The Vachanãmrut

477

this Satsang; only then will he be able to remain a satsangi,
otherwise he will fall from Satsang.
16

“When a devotee of God experiences hardships of any kind, it
should be known that the source of those miseries is not kãl, karma
or mãyã. In actual fact, it is God Himself who inspires hardships to
befall upon His devotees in order to test their patience. Then, just as
a man hides behind a curtain and watches, God hides in the heart of
His devotee and from there He observes the devotee’s patience.
Besides, who are kãl, karma and mãyã that they could harm a
devotee of God? So, realising it to be God’s wish, a devotee of God
should remain cheerful.”

17

Upon hearing this, Muktãnand Swãmi asked a question:
“Mahãrãj, the discourse in which You have just described the three
inclinations is very subtle and difficult to put into practise. Only a
few can understand it and only a few can actually live by it; not
everyone can do so. However, there are hundreds of thousands of
people in this Satsang fellowship, and it would be difficult for all of
them to understand this principle. So, how can they progress?”

18

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “If a person behaves as a servant of
the servants of a devotee who possesses one of these three
inclinations, and if he also follows his commands, then despite not
understanding anything else, he would certainly become an
attendant of God after this very life and would thus become fulfilled.

19

“In this world, the glory of God and His Bhakta is indeed very
great. After all, no matter how sinful or insignificant a person may
be, if he seeks the refuge of God and His Bhakta, that person will
become absolutely fulfilled. Such is the greatness of God and His
Bhakta. Therefore, one who has received the opportunity to serve
God’s Bhakta should remain fearless.”

20

Finally, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “I have delivered this discourse
about the three inclinations mainly for the sake of Muktãnand
Swãmi because I have a great deal of affection for him. So, bearing
in mind that Muktãnand Swãmi is suffering from an illness, I spoke
today so as to be sure that no form of deficiency remains in his
understanding.”

21

In reply, Muktãnand Swãmi said, “Mahãrãj, I also felt that You
delivered this discourse for me.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-62 || 195 ||
The Vachanãmrut

478

Gadhadã II-63
Gaining Strength
1

On Mãgshar vadi 2, Samvat 1881 [8 December 1824], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting in His place of residence in
Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. At that time, Bhajanãnand
Swãmi was reading the Shrimad Bhãgwat before Shriji Mahãrãj, and
other paramhansas as well as devotees from various places had also
gathered before Him in an assembly.

2

Thereupon Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “The thought which rests
between the drashtã and the drashya keeps the drashtã and drashya
separated. In this, what should be understood as the consciousness of
the jiva and what should be understood as the consciousness of the
antahkaran?”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “It seems to Me that if one’s jiva has
become extremely powerful, then the vruttis of one’s antahkaran are,
in fact, the vruttis of one’s jiva. These vruttis seem to be divided into
four categories, according to the four respective functions of the
antahkaran.
Thus, the consciousness in the indriyas and
antahkaran is that of the jiva itself. Therefore, the jiva allows the
indriyas and antahkaran to apply themselves wherever it is
appropriate to do so and restricts them from doing as they please
where it is inappropriate to do so. In fact, if one’s jiva has become
very powerful, one would not even have impure dreams. On the
other hand, if one’s jiva is lacking in strength, then one should follow
the principle of Sãnkhya and behave only as the ãtmã – the
drashtã – but one should not associate with one’s indriyas and
antahkaran. By behaving as the ãtmã in this way, one’s jiva gains
great strength.

4

“There is, however, an even greater method than this to gain
strength. If a person has love for God and His Sant, possesses
intense shraddhã in serving them, and also engages in the nine types
of bhakti, then his jiva will instantly gain strength. Thus, for
making the jiva stronger, there is no method comparable to that of
serving God and His Bhakta.”

5

Shriji Mahãrãj then said, “I shall now tell you a personal
principle of Mine.” So saying, He continued, “When I became ill in
the year of 1869, I saw Kailãs and Vaikunth, and I also saw Myself
riding on Nandishwar and riding on Garud. However, I did not find
The Vachanãmrut

479

any pleasure in those powers. Thereafter, I began to behave only as
the ãtmã, whereupon all disturbances subsided. But then I thought,
‘Much better than behaving as the ãtmã is to stay within the
fellowship of God and His devotees.’ I then became afraid, ‘What if by
behaving as the ãtmã, I cannot return to this body again?’ Thus, to
stay within the fellowship of God and His devotees and thus be able to
serve them in whichever way possible, is indeed the very best
spiritual endeavour.”
6

Thereafter Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “Countless types of mental
and physical suffering arise during the final moments of a person’s
life. But when one has the darshan of God and His Sant, all those
miseries are expelled. Such is the greatness of God and His Bhakta.
In actual fact, the Bhakta of God is indeed nothing but a form of
Brahma. That is why one should never perceive human traits in
him.

7

“In addition, with the devotees of God one should behave in the
same manner as family members do amongst themselves. For
example, even if a person scolds his own family members out of
affection, or if they happen to scold him, grudges still do not develop
in their hearts. With devotees of God, one should behave in the same
manner. On the other hand, if a person does develop a grudge with
God or His devotees, I do not even like to look at him. In fact, My
anger with such a person never subsides. Moreover, those in this
world who commit the five grave sins10 can still be redeemed
someday, whereas one who spites devotees of God can never be
redeemed.

8

“Thus, there is no merit greater than that of serving devotees of
God, and there is no sin graver than that of spiting devotees of God.
Therefore, if one wishes to make one’s jiva powerful, then one should
sincerely serve God and His devotees by thought, word and deed.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-63 || 196 ||

Gadhadã II-64
Purushottam Bhatt’s Question
1

On Posh sudi 7, Samvat 1881 [27 December 1824], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a cushion with a cylindrical
pillow that had been placed on a large, decorated cot on the veranda
The Vachanãmrut

480

outside the mandir of Shri Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s
darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white clothes. At
that time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees from various
places had gathered before Him.
2

Thereupon Swayamprakãshãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, are
all avatãrs of God equal, or are there distinctions among them?”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “After listening to and analytically
pondering over all of the scriptures written by Vyãsji, the conclusion
I have reached regarding the avatãrs of God – such as Matsya,
Kachchha, Varãh, Nrusinh, etc. – is that Shri Krishna Bhagwãn is
the source of them all. That is to say, Shri Krishna Bhagwãn is not
an avatãr like the other avatãrs, but is himself the source of all
avatãrs. That very Shri Krishna Bhagwãn is our ishtadev. His
divine incidents are comprehensively narrated in the tenth canto of
the Shrimad Bhãgwat Purãn. In fact, I have also considered it as a
great authority in our Uddhav Sampradãy.

4

“As all other avatãrs are also of Shri Krishna Bhagwãn, we
should respect those avatãrs and all scriptures which expound those
avatãrs.
Nevertheless, we should primarily respect only Shri
Krishna Bhagwãn and the scriptures which expound him.”

5

Thereafter Purushottam Bhatt asked a question, “God created
this world for the liberation of the jivas. But would it not have been
possible for God, without creating this world, to grant liberation to
the jivas while they were dormant in the womb of mãyã? Instead,
why does He take the trouble of creating this whole world? That is
the question.”

6

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “Bhagwãn Shri Krishna Purushottam is
the sovereign ruler and is eternal. He is forever present on his
throne in his Akshardhãm. Within the refuge of that Akshardhãm
reside countless millions of brahmãnds. For example, a king who
rules over the whole world owns innumerable villages, and of those, if
one or two were to become desolate, or if one or two became populated,
he would not even take notice. Similarly, Shri Krishna Bhagwãn is
the lord of countless millions of brahmãnds. Those brahmãnds,
however, are not destroyed all at once. Thus, if one or two
brahmãnds are destroyed, God would not even take note of it.

The Vachanãmrut

481

7

“In addition, the birth of that Shri Krishna Bhagwãn from
Devkiji is, strictly speaking, only for the sake of narration, because
in actual fact, he is forever beyond birth.

8

“Furthermore, by its vyatirek nature, the Akshardhãm of Shri
Krishna Bhagwãn transcends Prakruti-Purush, and by its anvay
nature it pervades everywhere – just as ãkãsh by its anvay nature is
present everywhere and by its vyatirek nature transcends the four
bhuts. So it is for Shri Krishna Bhagwãn’s Akshardhãm.

9

“Moreover, Shri Krishna Bhagwãn forever dwells within that
abode. But despite being present in Akshardhãm, he also grants
darshan to whomever, wherever and in whichever way it is
necessary. He speaks to whomever it is necessary to speak to and
even touches whomever it is necessary to touch. Just as one who has
attained yogic powers can – while remaining in one place – see for
thousands of miles and hear talks from thousands of miles away,
similarly, despite being in his Akshardhãm, God also reveals himself
in the countless millions of brahmãnds wherever there is a need to be
revealed. Nevertheless, he himself is still always present in his
Akshardhãm. The fact that he remains in one place and yet reveals
himself in countless places is a demonstration of his yogic powers –
just as during the rãs episode, when he assumed as many forms as
there were gopis. This use of God’s yogic powers to remain in one
place and at the same time to appear in countless places is itself his
pervasive form. But unlike ãkãsh, he does not pervade without
possessing a form.

10

“Moreover, by the yogic powers of God, the 500 million-yojan
surface of the pruthvi becomes the size of a sub-atomic particle at the
time of dissolution. Then, at the time of creation, from being subatomic in size, the pruthvi again becomes 500 million yojans large.
Also, thunder, lightning and dense clouds of rain appear in the
monsoon season. These and all other such wonders are all due to the
yogic powers of God.

11

“That Shri Krishna Bhagwãn is worthy to be worshipped by
spiritual aspirants in every way. Because while the other avatãrs
possessed the grandeur of maybe one or two powers, Shri Krishna
Bhagwãn possesses all powers. After all, Shri Krishna Bhagwãn is
not only amorous, he is also a renunciant; he possesses gnãn and is
also the sovereign ruler; he is a coward as well as brave. He is
extremely compassionate and is a master of all yogic powers. He is
The Vachanãmrut

482

very strong, as well as very deceptive. In this respect, then, only
Shri Krishna Bhagwãn possesses all powers.
12

“It is in Shri Krishna Bhagwãn’s Akshardhãm that the
countless millions of brahmãnds are supported forever. Of those,
when the 100-year lifespani of a particular brahmãnd expires, that
brahmãnd is destroyed. From this it is clear that not all brahmãnds
are destroyed at the same time. So, if other brahmãnds are still
present at the time of dissolution, why should God grant liberation to
the jivas at that time? This is the answer to the question.”

13

In this way, Shriji Mahãrãj indirectly revealed Himself as
Purushottam. Upon hearing this, all of the devotees realised that
that same Shri Krishna Purushottam is, in fact, the son of Dharma
and Bhakti – Shriji Mahãrãj.
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-64 || 197 ||

Gadhadã II-65
The Over-Wise
1

On Posh sudi 11, Samvat 1881 [1 January 1825], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot near the
mandir of Shri Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in
Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, an
assembly of munis as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him.

2

Then Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Please listen, as I wish to speak
about God.”

3

The sãdhus, who were singing devotional songs to the
accompaniment of a tãl and pakhwãj, stopped singing. They then
folded their hands and settled down to listen.

4

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj began, “When God manifests for the
liberation of the jivas as an avatãr such as Rãm, Krishna, etc., He is
not infatuated by anything in this world, which is the result of mãyã.
In fact, due to His transcendental majesty, He behaves absolutely
fearlessly. However, for the sake of accepting the bhakti of His

i The 100-year lifespan referred to here is the lifespan of Brahmã.

The Vachanãmrut

483

devotees, He also quite thoroughly indulges in the panchvishays.
Seeing this, those people in the world who are over-wise, perceive
faults in God. They think, ‘He maybe called God, but He has more
attachment to this world than we do.’ Thinking thus, they consider
God to be human, just like themselves, but they do not realise His
transcendental greatness. This in itself is God’s mãyã.
5

“In fact, even a sãdhu who has realised the ãtmã and has
become brahmarup is not infatuated upon seeing any object of this
world. So then, what is surprising about Shri Krishna Bhagwãn –
who is Parabrahma, and who transcends Brahma – being able to
remain uninfluenced by mãyã and the results of mãyã? He certainly
can.”

6

Having said this, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “A sãdhu who has
attained ãtmã-realisation also possesses intense vairãgya; due to both
of these virtues, he will not become attached to anything in any way.
However, if he does not possess bhakti towards God, it is as good as
preparing many different types of food dishes but not adding salt; i.e.,
all would be tasteless. In the same way, without the bhakti of God,
ãtmã-realisation and vairãgya alone are simply useless; one can
never attain liberation through them.

7

“Realising this, Shukji, despite having already become
brahmaswarup, studied the Shrimad Bhãgwat and offered profound
bhakti to Shri Krishna Bhagwãn.
Therefore, it is a great
shortcoming of one who has ãtmã-realisation to not have bhakti
towards God.

8

“In the same way, if one has bhakti towards God, but does not
have the virtues of ãtmã-realisation and vairãgya, then just as one
has love towards God, one will also develop love towards other things.
Thus, this is a major shortcoming for those following the path of
bhakti.

9

“Now, a perfect devotee of God has thoroughly realised God’s
greatness, and thus, everything except God seems insignificant to
him. That is why he is not infatuated by anything. Therefore, when
one possesses all three virtues of ãtmã-realisation, vairãgya and
bhakti towards God, one can be said to have no deficiencies
whatsoever. Such a person is called a devotee with gnãn, an ekãntik
bhakta and a staunch devotee of God.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-65 || 198 ||
The Vachanãmrut

484

Gadhadã II-66
Questions to the Senior Sãdhus;
Holding a Red-Hot Iron Ball
1

On Posh vadi 1, Samvat 1881 [5 January 1825], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a cushion with a cylindrical
pillow that had been placed on a large, decorated cot on the veranda
outside the east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.
He was dressed entirely in white clothes. Garlands of yellow flowers
and red guldãvadi flowers adorned His neck, and a tassel of yellow
flowers decorated His pãgh. At that time, while some sãdhus were
singing a Vishnupad to the accompaniment of a sarodã and dukad,
munis as well as devotees from various places had gathered before
Him in an assembly.

2

After the devotional songs had finished, Shriji Mahãrãj said,
“Today I wish to ask all of the senior sãdhus some questions.”
Having said this, He directed His first question to Ãnand Swãmi. He
said, “Suppose there is a person who, despite having little
intelligence, recognises his own faults and does not look at the faults
of other devotees; instead, he looks only at their virtues. On the
other hand, suppose there is another person who is very intelligent,
yet he does not see his own faults. Moreover, he overlooks the virtues
of other devotees and looks only at their faults. Why is it that the
person with little intelligence finds faults in himself, whereas the
person with much intelligence cannot realise his own faults? That is
the question.”

3

Ãnand Swãmi answered as he thought correct, but he was
unable to give a satisfactory reply.

4

So Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “The answer to that is as follows: It
is because that person has offended some great devotee of God either
in this life or in a past life. As a result of that sin, his intellect has
become corrupted. That is why he perceives faults in devotees
without being able to realise faults in himself. This is the only
answer to that question.”

5

Next, Shriji Mahãrãj asked Nityãnand Swãmi a question, “Is
there only one means to attain God, or are there many? You may say
that God can be attained by four means – gnãn, vairãgya, bhakti and
dharma. But if God is attained by these four means, then the
The Vachanãmrut

485

principle that liberation can be attained exclusively by seeking the
refuge God does not stand.”
6

Nityãnand Swãmi tried to answer the question in many different
ways but was unable to do so satisfactorily.

7

So Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Liberation is only attained by the refuge
of God. However, God is very powerful; even the deities such as
Brahmã and others live under His command. In fact, out of fear of
God, even the causes of all of the brahmãnds, namely kãl, mãyã, etc.,
conscientiously follow His commands. Obviously then, a devotee of
God should also strictly follow God’s commands; that is the very
characteristic of a devotee of God. For this reason, all other spiritual
endeavours should also be performed strictly. Thus, liberation is
possible only through God, whereas those other spiritual endeavours
are for the purpose of pleasing God. That is the only answer to the
question.”

8

Then Shriji Mahãrãj asked Brahmãnand Swãmi, “Does the jiva,
which dwells within the body, possess a form, or is it formless?”

9

Brahmãnand Swãmi replied, “It possesses a form.”

10

Hearing this, Shriji Mahãrãj queried, “If the jiva did possess a
form, then that would mean it has hands and feet, as well as other
limbs. However, the Vedstuti chapter of the tenth canto of the
Shrimad Bhãgwat states, ‘God created the buddhi, indriyas, man
and prãns to enable the jiva to attain liberation.’ If the jiva itself did
possess a form, then what would be the need of creating the buddhi,
indriyas, man and prãns for it? Therefore, seeing such words in the
scriptures, one can only conclude that the jiva is by its inherent
nature characterised by eternal existence and consciousness.

11

“The jiva also possesses the kãran body, which is the
embodiment of eternal ignorance. Just as a magnetic rock attracts
iron and then sticks to the iron, similarly, the jiva has a nature of
sticking; thus it sticks to the two mãyik bodies – the sthul body and
the sukshma body. Then, due to its ignorance, the jiva believes those
bodies to be its own. In reality, though, the jiva is not like those
bodies at all.”

12

Then Brahmãnand Swãmi asked, “After the ignorance of the jiva
is dispelled by the bhakti of God, the association between the jiva and
the three mãyik bodies, i.e., sthul, sukshma and kãran, no longer
The Vachanãmrut

486

remains. So when the jiva attains the abode of God, with what type
of form does it stay there?”
13

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “When the jiva’s ignorance is dispelled,
its association with the three mãyik bodies is broken. Thereafter, the
jiva remains as pure existence and consciousness. Then, by God’s
will, the jiva receives a body composed of chaitanya prakruti – which
is distinct from the eight types of jad prakruti of God, i.e., pruthvi,
jal, etc. With that body, then, it stays in God’s Akshardhãm. This is
the answer to your question.”

14

Thereafter, Shriji Mahãrãj asked Gopãlãnand Swãmi a question;
“It is due to the grace of God and His Sant that one can master
ashtãng-yoga or realise the ãtmã. Why is it, then, that even though
God and His Sant are the cause of these, they become secondary, and
instead one’s interest in yoga and ãtmã-realisation increases?”

15

Gopãlãnand Swãmi replied, “After practising ashtãng-yoga,
when one actually masters it, one develops a little conceit. As a
result, one becomes somewhat less interested in God.”

16

To this, Shriji Mahãrãj commented, “When a yogi attains Godrealisation, he also becomes brahmarup, and no form of conceit is
possible in Brahma. Thus your answer is not consistent.”

17

Gopãlãnand Swãmi then said, “Mahãrãj, I cannot understand
this. Please be compassionate and explain it to Me.”

18

So Shriji Mahãrãj began, “It should be understood in the
following way: When a person wishes to eradicate his faults, he
should eradicate them after consulting the words of the great. For
example, if a person has some worldly task to perform, and he wants
to accomplish that job extremely well, he should consult some
experts. Similarly, such consultation is necessary here as well. For
example, Shukji had become brahmaswarup, yet he studied the
Shrimad Bhãgwat with great enthusiasm. In fact, even to this very
day, he engages in the bhakti of God. Furthermore, the 88,000
rishis, including Shaunak, had become brahmaswarup, yet they too
listened to the discourses related to God from Sutpurãni. Thus, one
should take guidance from such words to consolidate one’s bhakti.

19

“For those faults which one cannot recognise, one should pray to
God: ‘Mahãrãj, please be compassionate and destroy whichever faults
I may have’ – just as when a man has been accused of something and
has no witnesses to disprove the allegation, then he proves his
The Vachanãmrut

487

innocence by holding a red-hot iron balli . Similarly, if a fault cannot
be realised, one should pray to God for the eradication of that fault,
which amounts to holding the iron ball. One should eradicate one’s
faults in this manner. That is the answer to your question.”
20

Thereafter, Shriji Mahãrãj asked Muktãnand Swãmi a question:
“Suppose a devotee of God has thoroughly realised God, but God does
not show him any miracles. Now, if some other performer of magical
spells does show him a miracle, then upon seeing this, would the
mind of that devotee waver from God, or not?”

21

Muktãnand Swãmi replied, “Mahãrãj, if a person has absolute
faith in God, then he would never have faith in anyone but God. On
the other hand, if a person does have faith in someone else, then he
does not have faith in God at all. Such a person is merely a
superficial devotee; he cannot be called a true devotee of God.”

22

Hearing this, Shriji Mahãrãj agreed, “That is the exact answer
to the question.”

23

Finally, Shriji Mahãrãj asked Shuk Muni, “If a devotee of God
has attained realisation of God and His Sant, then how does he
benefit while he is alive, and how does he benefit after he dies?”

24

Shuk Muni said, “Mahãrãj, that question can be answered only
by You.”

25

So Shriji Mahãrãj said, “While alive, a person who has attained
God and His Sant spends his days and nights engrossed in spiritual
discourses, devotional songs, etc., related to God. He also has the
direct realisation of his jivãtmã, which transcends the three states7,
as being brahmarup. With the exception of God, he develops
vairãgya for all other objects. Also, he discards adharma and abides
by dharma.

26

“When that devotee dies, God makes him just like Himself. In
fact, God had blessed Brahmã: ‘O Brahmã! By My grace, may you
know Me as I am, My glory as it is, and My virtues and actions as
they are.’ So just as God had blessed Brahmã, He also grants the
same blessings to all of His faithful devotees. In addition, just as God
i Refers to a custom where an alleged criminal was asked to prove his innocence

by holding a red-hot iron ball.
considered innocent.

The Vachanãmrut

If his hands did not develop burns, he was

488

is free from kãl, karma and mãyã, in the same way, that devotee of
God also becomes free from kãl, karma and mãyã. Also, he forever
resides in the service of God. This is how that devotee benefits after
he abandons his body. That is the answer to the question.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-66 || 199 ||

Gadhadã II-67
The Gangãjaliyo Well
1

On Mahã vadi 3, Samvat 1881 [6 February 1825], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a cushion with a cylindrical
pillow that had been placed on a large, decorated cot on the platform
near the Gangãjaliyo well adjacent to His residence in Dãdã
Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white
clothes. At that time, some sãdhus were singing a Vishnupad to the
accompaniment of a dukad and sarodã, while munis as well as
devotees from various places had gathered before Him in an
assembly.

2

Upon completion of the singing of devotional songs, Shriji
Mahãrãj said, “I wish to ask all of the sãdhus the following question:
A devotee of God leaves his body, becomes brahmarup, and attains
the abode of God. Thereafter, what is the difference between that
devotee and God, whereby the master-servant relationship between
them still remains? After all, that devotee of God then becomes
independent, just like God. He also becomes free from the shackles of
kãl, karma and mãyã – just like God. Therefore, what difference
remains so that the master-servant relationship is maintained? This
is My question.”

3

The paramhansas answered according to their understanding,
but they could not supply a precise answer to Shriji Mahãrãj’s
question. So, all of the sãdhus said, “Mahãrãj, Your question will
only be answered when You Yourself answer it.”

4

Thereupon, Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “The answer is as follows:
In whatever way a devotee of God has realised God – i.e., ‘God
possesses this many powers; He possesses this much charm; He is
the embodiment of bliss;’ and so on – that is the extent to which he
has realised the greatness of God. Then, when that devotee leaves
his body and goes to the abode of God, he attains charm and powers
The Vachanãmrut

489

based on the extent to which he has realised the majesty of God.
Despite this, that devotee still feels God’s majesty in the form of His
powers, charm, etc., to be much greater. He then realises, ‘God has
granted me just as many divine powers and as much charm as I had
realised in Him. Yet, God’s divine powers and charm appear to be
totally limitless. Like me, countless others have also attained
qualities similar to that of God, yet, no one is capable of becoming
like God.’
5

“Why is this so? Because not even Shesh, Shãradã, Brahmã or
the other deities – in fact, not even the four Vedas – can fathom the
vastness of God’s greatness, His virtues, His actions, His birth, His
power, His charm, His blissful nature, or His countless other
redemptive virtues. In fact, God Himself cannot comprehend the
limits of His own greatness. Thus God, with all of His powers, is
beyond all limits.

6

“By worshipping that God, countless millions of Vaishnavs have
become like God; yet, God’s majesty has not diminished even slightly.
For example, even if there were an ocean filled with sweet water from
which all humans, animals and birds could drink as much as they
wished, and from which vessels could be filled, the water would still
not decrease because of the vastness of the ocean. Similarly, God’s
greatness is unfathomable; there is no way in which it can either
increase or decrease. For this reason, then, those devotees of God
who become brahmaswarup, still behave as God’s servants and
engage in His worship. In this way, devotees of God attain qualities
similar to those of God, and yet, the master-servant

relationship between them is maintained. That is the answer to the
question.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II-67 || 200 ||

The Vachanãmrut

490

|| End of Gadhadã II Section ||

The Vachanãmrut

491

The Vachanãmrut

492

VARTÃL SECTION
Vartãl-1
Nirvikalp Samãdhi
1

On Kãrtik sudi 11, Samvat 1882 [21 November 1825], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a cushion with a
cylindrical pillow that had been placed on an ornate seat in the
mango grove along the banks of Lake Gomti on the north side of the
mandir of Shri Lakshminãrãyan in Vartãl. He was wearing a white
survãl and a white angarkhu. He had also tied a blue reto around
His waist. An orange reto with edges decorated with golden threads
was tied around His head, and another orange reto with a brocaded
border was resting upon His shoulder. In addition to this, a garland
of roses was hanging around His neck, tassels of roses had been
placed upon His head, and a string of rose flowers as well as an
armlet had been tied around His arms. Beautifully adorned in this
manner, Shriji Mahãrãj sat facing north, while munis as well as
devotees from various places gathered before Him in an assembly.

2

At that time, Shobhãrãm Shãstri of Vadodarã asked Shriji
Mahãrãj a question: “Mahãrãj, when an aspirant attains nirvikalp
samãdhi, he becomes gunãtit and an ekãntik bhakta of God. What,
then, becomes of one who does not attain nirvikalp samãdhi?”

3

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “It is not the case that
nirvikalp samãdhi is attained only when the prãns are controlled.
There is another way to nirvikalp samãdhi, which I shall explain to
you; so please listen carefully.

4

“The Shrimad Bhãgwat states:

•òÊ ‚ªÙ¸ Áfl‚ª¸p SÕÊŸ¢ ¬Ù·áÊ◊ÍÃÿ—–
◊ãflãÃ⁄U‡ÊÊŸÈ∑§ÕÊ ÁŸ⁄UÙœÙ ◊ÈÁQ ⁄UÊüÊÿ—H i
i Atra sargo visargash-cha sthãnam poshanam-ootayaha|

Manvantareshãnukathã nirodho muktir-ãshrayaha||

The Vachanãmrut

493

This verse explains that when a spiritual aspirant establishes a firm
conviction of Shri Krishna Bhagwãn – who is worthy of being taken
the refuge of and who can be realised through the nine
characteristics of sarg, visarg, etc. – then he will never have a doubt.
For example, once one has firmly realised that this is a mango
tree, then even if one is overcome by lust, anger or avarice, one will
not entertain any doubts such as, ‘Is this a mango tree or not?’ In
the same manner, regardless of whether a person has controlled his
prãns or not, if he has a firm conviction of the manifest form of Shri
Krishna Bhagwãn – without any form of doubts whatsoever – then he
has attained nirvikalp samãdhi.
5

“However, someone may repeatedly have doubts in his mind
about God’s nature. For example, he may think, ‘What must God’s
form be like in Brahmapur? What must His form be like in
Shwetdwip and Vaikunth? When will I have the darshan of that
form?’ He continues to harbour such doubts in his mind, but he does
not feel fulfilled by realising that the incarnate form of God that he
has attained is alone the cause of everything. Even if he attains
samãdhi by God’s wish, his doubts are never eradicated. No matter
what he sees in samãdhi, he always desires to see something new;
never are the desires of his mind subdued. Even if such a person
experiences samãdhi, it is savikalp samãdhi; and even if he does not
experience samãdhi, it is still savikalp samãdhi. Therefore, such a
person cannot be called a gunãtit, ekãntik bhakta. One who does
have the firm conviction of God, regardless of whether he has
samãdhi or not, can be said to have constant nirvikalp samãdhi.”

This verse lists ten characteristics or topics of discussion by which the form of
God can be realised: (1) sarg – creation from mahattattva to the five bhuts, etc.,
i.e. creation up to Virãt-Purush; (2) visarg – creation by Brahmã; (3) sthãn –
supremacy of God in battle, etc.; (4) poshan – God’s compassion in the form of
His protecting of the world; (5) ooti – karma and vãsanã; (6) manvantar-kathã –
dharma of Manu and the subsequent kings; (7) eeshãnukathã – incidents of the
various avatãrs of God and His devotees; (8) nirodh – dwelling in a subtle form
within the various forms of Prakruti; (9) mukti – renouncing the form of a deity
or human and residing in His original form; (10) ãshray – God as the refuge of
the creation, sustenance and dissolution of the cosmos.
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 2.10.1

The Vachanãmrut

494

6

Then Dinãnãth Bhatt asked, “What will become of one who,
despite attempting to eradicate the desires in one’s mind, fails to
conquer the mind?”

7

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “As the war between the Kauravs and
the Pãndavs was set to begin, the Kauravs and the Pãndavs thought,
‘Let us engage in the battle in such a holy place that even if one is
killed in the fighting, one’s jiva will still benefit.’ With this thought
in mind, they eventually fought at Kurukshetra. Thereafter, those
who won obviously benefited. Those who were killed in the battle,
though, attained Devlok and obtained happiness greater than that of
ruling over a kingdom.

8

“Hence, regarding one who takes up a fight with his mind – if he
wins, then he attains nirvikalp samãdhi and becomes an ekãntik
bhakta of God. But if he should lose to his mind, he falls from his
spiritual endeavours. Then, maybe after one life or two lives or even
after many lives, ultimately, he will become an ekãntik bhakta; but
his efforts will not have been in vain.

9

“Thus, a person who is wise should definitely develop enmity
towards his mind for the sake of his liberation. Thereby, if he
conquers his mind, he is sure to benefit; but even if he is defeated by
his mind, he will eventually return to the path of realisation, which
is also beneficial in the end. Therefore, one who aspires for liberation
should most certainly develop enmity towards his mind.”
|| Vachanãmrut Vartãl-1 || 201 ||

Vartãl-2
Realising God through the Four Scriptures;
Kãndãsji’s Question
1

On Kãrtik sudi 13, Samvat 1882 [22 November 1825], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot
under a mango tree on the banks of Lake Gomti, north of the mandir
of Shri Lakshminãrãyan in Vartãl. He was wearing a survãl made
from yellow, silken cloth and a red dagli made from kinkhãb. He had
also tied a pãgh around His head using an orange cloth with a
brocaded border. An orange shelu with a brocaded border was placed
upon His shoulder. In addition to this, His pãgh was decorated with
garlands of champã flowers, and garlands of white flowers also
The Vachanãmrut

495

adorned His neck. At that time, an assembly of munis as well as
devotees from various places had gathered before Him.
2

Then Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Please begin a question-answer
session.”

3

Thereupon Kãndãsji Patel of the village Bhuvã folded his hands
and asked, “Mahãrãj, by what means does God become pleased?”

4

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “If we do not malign God, then God
becomes pleased. Then you may ask, ‘What does it mean to malign
God?’ Well, God is the all-doer of this world. However, if one does
not understand Him to be the all-doer and instead believes that it is
kãl that is the all-doer of this world, or that it is mãyã, or that it is
karma, or that it is swabhãv that is the all-doer, then one is
maligning God. This is because actually God is the all-doer. To
ignore this and to claim that only kãl, karma, mãyã and swabhãv are
the all-doers of this world is serious slander against God.

5

“For example, you are the Pateli of your village. If someone does
not acknowledge your status in the village, then he can be said to be
your slanderer. Also, if someone does not accept the sovereignty of an
emperor of the world, but instead accepts the sovereignty of one who
is not even a king, then that man is known as a slanderer of the
emperor. If one writes and distributes letters stating, ‘Our king has
no nose and ears; he has no hands or feet,’ and thereby describes the
king as being deformed even though he has a normal body, then he is
also known as a slanderer of the king. Similarly, God is complete,
with limbs, hands, feet, etc. There is not the slightest deformation in
any of His limbs. He eternally possesses a definite form. So, to say
that He is not the all-doer and is formless, and that kãl and others
are the cause of all – not God – is equivalent to maligning God.

6

“One who does not malign God in this manner is said to have
performed perfect puja of God.
Otherwise, without such an
understanding, even if one performs puja by offering sandalwood
paste, flowers, etc., one is still a slanderer of God. Therefore, God is
only pleased upon one who realises God to possess a definite form and
to be the creator, sustainer and destroyer of the cosmos.

i Here ‘Patel’ refers to the chief of a village.

The Vachanãmrut

496

7

“In the Vedas, God Himself has described His nature in many
ways, but no one could comprehend it. Then the Sãnkhya scriptures
prescribed the 24 elements2 and said that God is the 25th. The
ãchãrya of the Sãnkhya philosophy, Kapil Muni, thought, ‘The jiva
behaves as if it is one with the three types of bodies – i.e., sthul,
sukshma and kãran – and it cannot remain separate from them. The
ishwar also behaves as if it is one with its adjuncts in the form of its
three bodies – virãt, sutrãtmã and avyãkrut – and it too cannot
remain separate from them.’ Thus, the Sãnkhya scriptures count
jiva and ishwar amongst the 24 elements and claim Paramãtmã to
be the 25th.

8

“The ãchãrya of the Yoga scriptures, Hiranyagarbh Rishi,
propounds that there are 24 elements, and that jiva and ishwar are
the 25th; but Paramãtmã is the 26th.

9

“This is how the Sãnkhya scriptures and the Yoga scriptures
described God’s nature; still, no one attained realisation of the nature
of God as He is. By inference it was accepted, ‘According to the
Sãnkhya doctrine, whatever transcends the 24 elements is satya.’
According to the Yoga doctrine it was inferred, ‘Paramãtmã, who
transcends jiva and ishwar, who themselves transcend the 24
elements, is satya.’ In this manner, through these two philosophies,
the nature of God was realised by inference. However, is that God
black or yellow? Is He tall or short? Does He possess a form, or is
He formless? That was not realised.

10

“Thereafter, Vãsudev Bhagwãn himself composed the
Panchrãtra Tantra, in which he explained, ‘In his own Akshardhãm,
Shri Krishna Purushottam Bhagwãn eternally possesses a divine
form. This God gives darshan five times to the countless nirannamuktas, the residents of Shwetdwip. In Vaikunth, that same God
assumes a four-armed form, holding a conch, a disc, a mace, and a
lotus.
Along with him is Lakshmiji.
He is also served by
Vishwaksen and other attendants. It is that same God who is worthy
of being offered puja, worthy of worship and worthy of attainment. It
is that same God who assumes the avatãrs of Rãm, Krishna, etc.,
and who appears in the four forms of Vãsudev, Sankarshan,
Pradyumna and Aniruddha.’ In this way, he propounded that God
possesses a form.

11

“Then Nãradji revised that same Panchrãtra Tantra, after
which it came to be known as the Nãrad Panchrãtra. In that, God’s
The Vachanãmrut

497

form was explained in such a manner that not even the slightest
doubt remained. Thus, the Shrimad Bhãgwat states:

ŸÊ⁄UÊÿáÊ¬⁄UÊ flŒÊ ŒflÊ ŸÊ⁄UÊÿáÊÊæU˜ª¡Ê—–
ŸÊ⁄UÊÿáÊ¬⁄UÊ ‹Ù∑§Ê ŸÊ⁄UÊÿáÊ¬⁄UÊ ◊πÊ—H
ŸÊ⁄UÊÿáÊ¬⁄UÙ ÿÙªÙ ŸÊ⁄UÊÿáÊ¬⁄¢ Ã¬—–
ŸÊ⁄UÊÿáÊ¬⁄¢ ôÊÊŸ¢ ŸÊ⁄UÊÿáÊ¬⁄UÊ ªÁÃ—H i
It also states:

flÊ‚ÈŒfl¬⁄UÊ flŒÊ flÊ‚ÈŒfl¬⁄UÊ ◊πÊ—–
flÊ‚ÈŒfl¬⁄UÊ ÿÙªÊ flÊ‚ÈŒfl¬⁄UÊ— Á∑˝§ÿÊ—H

i Nãrãyana-parã vedã devã nãrãyanãngajãhã|

Nãrãyana-parã lokã nãrãyana-parã makhãhã||
Nãrãyana-paro yogo nãrãyana-param tapaha|
Nãrãyana-param gnãnam nãrãyana-parã gatihi||
The Vedas are devoted to Nãrãyan [i.e. the essence of the Vedas is Nãrãyan]; the
deities are all formed from the form of Nãrãyan; the realms are all devoted to
Nãrãyan [i.e. all the realms are pervaded by Nãrãyan]; all yagnas are devoted to
Nãrãyan [i.e. the objective of all yagnas is Nãrãyan]. All yoga, too, is devoted to
Nãrãyan [i.e. the objective of all yogic practices is Nãrãyan]; all austerities are
devoted to Nãrãyan [i.e. the objective of all austerities is Nãrãyan]; all gnãn is
devoted to Nãrãyan [i.e. the essence of all gnãn is Nãrãyan]; [indeed,] Nãrãyan is
[the objective of] all endeavours.
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 2.5.15 & 16

The Vachanãmrut

498

flÊ‚ÈŒfl¬⁄¢ ôÊÊŸ¢ flÊ‚ÈŒfl¬⁄¢ Ã¬—–
flÊ‚ÈŒfl¬⁄UÙ œ◊Ù¸ flÊ‚ÈŒfl¬⁄UÊ ªÁÃ—H i
12

“Thus, the four scriptures have described the nature of Shri
Krishna Vãsudev only. Only one who realises God through these four
scriptures can be said to possess total gnãn. For example, only when
one sees with one’s eyes does one come to know that milk is white;
only when one smells with one’s nose does one come to know its
smell; only when one touches it with one’s finger does one come to
know whether it is hot or cold; and only when one tastes it with one’s
tongue does one come to know its taste. In this manner, only when
milk is tested through all of the indriyas can one totally know its
nature; it cannot be totally known through one indriya alone.
Similarly, one realises God’s nature totally when one realises it
through the four scriptures, i.e., the Vedas, etc. To have such
knowledge is called total gnãn.

13

“God is pleased only upon someone who has such understanding;
there is no other means of pleasing Him. Thus, only one who has
such realisation can be said to possess total gnãn, and God becomes
extremely pleased only upon such a person.”
|| Vachanãmrut Vartãl-2 || 202 ||

i Vãsudeva-parã vedã vãsudeva-parã makhãhã|

Vãsudeva-parã yogã vãsudeva-parãhã kriyãhã||
Vãsudeva-param gnãnam vãsudeva-param tapaha|
Vãsudeva-paro dharmo vãsudeva-parã gatihi||
The Vedas are devoted to Vãsudev [i.e. the essence of the Vedas is Vãsudev]; all
yagnas are devoted to Vãsudev [i.e. the objective of all yagnas is Vãsudev]; all
yoga is devoted to Vãsudev [i.e. the objective of all yogic practices is Vãsudev]; all
activities are devoted to Vãsudev [i.e. the objective of all activities is Vãsudev].
All gnãn, too, is devoted to Vãsudev [i.e. the essence of all gnãn is Vãsudev]; all
austerities are devoted to Vãsudev [i.e. the objective of all austerities is
Vãsudev]; all dharma is devoted to Vãsudev [i.e. the objective of all dharma is
Vãsudev]; [indeed,] Vãsudev is [the objective of] all endeavours.
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 1.2.28 & 29

The Vachanãmrut

499

Vartãl-3
Four Types of Eminent Spiritual People
1

On Kãrtik vadi 11, Samvat 1882 [6 December 1825], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on an ornate seat in the
mandir of Shri Lakshminãrãyan in Vartãl. He was dressed entirely
in white clothes. He was also wearing garlands of roses around His
neck, and tassels decorated the pãgh upon His head. At that time,
an assembly of all of the munis, as well as devotees from various
places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “In our Uddhav Sampradãy one
who has the four virtues of dharma, gnãn, vairãgya and bhakti
towards God is called an ekãntik bhakta, and only he is worthy of
being made eminent in our Satsang fellowship. But if those four
virtues are not perfect and only one is predominant, then of the four,
which is the best in that it incorporates the other three?”

3

Gopãlãnand Swãmi and Muktãnand Swãmi replied, “Mahãrãj,
only dharma is such, because if there is dharma then the other three
virtues will eventually develop in that person.”

4

To this, Shriji Mahãrãj countered, “Dharma may be present
even in those who are non-believers. Does that mean that we should
make them eminent in Satsang?”

5

Hearing this argument, no one could give a reply to the
question. Shriji Mahãrãj then explained, “If one has bhakti towards
God coupled with knowledge of His greatness, one will never fall from
dharma – even if one has a lesser degree of ãtmã-realisation,
vairãgya and dharma. This is because he who realises God’s
greatness thinks, ‘If Brahmã and all the other deities follow God’s
commands, then how can I not follow His injunctions?’ Bearing this
in mind, he always abides by the niyams prescribed by God.”

6

Then Shuk Muni asked, “If bhakti coupled with the knowledge of
God’s greatness alone is enough, why are all four qualities prescribed
as essential, and not just bhakti alone?”

7

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “If one has intense bhakti for God coupled
with the knowledge of His greatness, then all three are incorporated
in bhakti alone. But if one’s bhakti is of a mediocre intensity, then
the other three are not incorporated therein. Thus, it is said, ‘One

The Vachanãmrut

500

who has the type of bhakti which encompasses all four qualities can
be called an ekãntik bhakta.’
8

“King Pruthu had such extraordinary bhakti. When God
conferred a boon upon him, he asked for 10,000 ears in order to hear
discourses related to God, but he did not ask for anything else. Also,
some gopis who were forbidden to go and play rãs discarded their
bodies and went to Shri Krishna in spirit. If one has such
extraordinary bhakti, then the other three virtues of gnãn, vairãgya,
etc., are all incorporated in bhakti alone.”

9

Brahmãnand Swãmi then asked, “By what means can such
extraordinary bhakti be attained?”

10

Thereupon, Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “It is attained by serving an
eminent spiritual person. There are four types of eminent spiritual
people. One is like a small flame, the second is like a torch, the third
is like lightning, and the fourth is like the vadvãnal fire.

11

“He who is like a small flame is extinguished by the wind in the
form of the vishays. He who is like a torch is extinguished by
stronger gusts of wind in the form of the vishays. He who is like
lightning is not extinguished even by rainwater in the form of mãyã.
The vadvãnal fire, however, stays in the ocean without being
extinguished by the ocean water; it drinks the sea water and excretes
it in the form of sweet water; in turn, the clouds carry this water and
shower it upon the world; and from this many types of tastes are
formed.
Similarly, the great Purush, like the vadvãnal fire,
transforms even the ‘salty’ jivas who are like the saline sea water,
into ‘sweet’ jivas.

12

“Of the four types of eminent spiritual people just described, if a
person serves one who is like lightning or the vadvãnal fire – by
thought, word and deed, while staying within the tenets of one’s
dharma – then bhakti coupled with the knowledge of God’s greatness
develops in that person.

13

“Also, one should realise that the person who is like lightning is
known as God’s ekãntik sãdhu – who is in the process of Godrealisation. The person who is like the vadvãnal fire is known as
God’s Param-Ekãntik Sant – who is perfectly God-realised.”
|| Vachanãmrut Vartãl-3 || 203 ||

The Vachanãmrut

501

Vartãl-4
A Fountain
1

On Mãgshar sudi 10, Samvat 1882 [19 December 1825], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting in the mandir of Shri
Lakshminãrãyan in Vartãl. He had donned all white clothes upon
His body. At that time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees
from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Then Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Please begin a question-answer
session.”

3

Thereupon Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “For a devotee of God who
has taken the path of bhakti, which one spiritual endeavour
incorporates all of the other endeavours for liberation?”

4

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “All of the spiritual endeavours for
attaining liberation are incorporated in keeping the company – by
thought, word and deed – of a Sant who possesses the 30 attributes of
a sãdhu11.”

5

After replying to the question, Shriji Mahãrãj asked, “Suppose
there is an ekãntik bhakta yogi who realises that the philosophy of
both the Sãnkhya scriptures and the Yoga scriptures is based upon
only Vãsudevnãrãyan. By what means does that yogi fix his vrutti
on God’s form? How does he control his mind? How does he keep
that form fixed in his mind? How does he keep his vrutti facing
within? How does he keep his vrutti facing outwards? By which of
his yogic abilities does he separate himself from the obstacles of
disturbing thoughts and desires, as well as from the assimilation of
sleep? Please answer these questions.”

6

Then Muktãnand Swãmi and Gopãlãnand Swãmi attempted to
answer these questions to the best of their ability, but neither of
them was able to give a satisfactory reply. Therefore, Shriji Mahãrãj
said, “When water goes into a fountain, it first revolves in a spiral
and then spurts upwards; in the same way, the vrutti of the jiva
revolves in a spiral in the antahkaran, which acts like the fountain,
and then spurts out through the five indriyas. A yogi does this in
two ways: With one vrutti, he contemplates upon Shri Vãsudev
Bhagwãn who resides in his heart as a witness. The other vrutti he
keeps facing outwards through his eyes. With this second vrutti, he
contemplates upon God who is outside. He contemplates upon the
whole form from head to toe; he does not contemplate separately upon
The Vachanãmrut

502

any single part of the body. Just as when one looks at a large
mandir, one sees it completely as a whole; or when one looks at a
large mountain, one sees it totally; similarly, the yogi sees God’s form
in the same way, but he does not see each part of God’s body
separately.
7

“When he beholds the form at a distance from his eyes, if he sees
some other object besides God, then he draws that form of God closer
and beholds it at the tip of his nose. Even after doing this, if he still
sees some object nearby, then he beholds the form of God between his
eyebrows. If while doing this he feels lazy or sleepy, then he would
again behold the form of God before his eyes. Then, in the same way
that a child flies a kite, he would fly a kite in the form of God’s form
with a string in the form of his vrutti. He would make it rise
upwards, then bring it down again, and then make it sweep from side
to side. Using his yogic powers in this way, when he becomes alert,
he would again behold the form at the tip of his nose, and from there
he would bring it between his eyebrows, and then he would draw it
into his heart. Then he would merge together both the form of God
that resides in his heart as a witness, and the form of God that is
outside. At this point, the two vruttis of the antahkaran become one.

8

“While doing this, if again he feels lazy or sleepy, then he would
bring the form outside again using the two types of vruttis. In the
same manner as with his eyes, he would use his ears, hands, tongue
and nose to perfect yoga. Also, he would behold God’s form with his
man, buddhi, chitt and ahamkãr. Using the sãnkhya thought
process, he would distinguish himself from his indriyas and
antahkaran and would behold only the form of God in his chaitanya.
If, while he is beholding the form, whether it be inside or outside,
some disturbance regarding worldly affairs obstructs him, then he
would remove the problem while continuing to behold the form; but
he would not abandon his yogic endeavours because of the
disturbance. This is how a yogi with such yogic powers behaves.”
|| Vachanãmrut Vartãl-4 || 204 ||

The Vachanãmrut

503

Vartãl-5
One Should Not Perceive Mãyã in God;
Performing Similar Service
1

On Mãgshar vadi 4, Samvat 1882 [29 December 1825], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting facing north on a large,
decorated seat under a mango tree along the banks of Lake Gomti,
north of the mandir of Shri Lakshminãrãyan in Vartãl. He was
dressed entirely in extremely fine, white clothes, and He had several
garlands of roses hanging around His neck. Bunches of flowers, each
made from two large roses, had been placed upon His ears, and
tassels made from roses decorated His pãgh. At that time, an
assembly of all of the munis as well as devotees from various places
had gathered before Him.

2

Then Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Please ask complex questions in
order to relieve everyone’s lethargy.” Having said that, Mahãrãj
Himself put a pillow facing west and lied down.

3

Thereupon Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “In the verse,

ŒÒflË sÔ·Ê ªÈáÊ◊ÿË ◊◊ ◊ÊÿÊ ŒÈ⁄UàÿÿÊ–
◊Ê◊fl ÿ ¬˝¬lãÃ ◊ÊÿÊ◊ÃÊ¢ Ã⁄UÁãÃ ÃH i
Shri Krishna Bhagwãn says, ‘A person who attains me transgresses
my mãyã – which is composed of the gunas and which cannot
otherwise be transgressed even by suffering hardships.’ Yet, even
after one has attained God, one is still disturbed by thoughts and
desires in one’s heart during the worship of God. What else, besides
mãyã, could be causing this? That is the question.”
4

Shriji Mahãrãj sat upright from his lying posture and with great
compassion said, “Of the three gunas of mãyã, the five bhuts and the
five tanmãtrãs are tamogun-predominant; the ten indriyas, the
buddhi and the prãns are rajogun-predominant; the man and the
presiding deities of the indriyas and antahkaran are sattvagunpredominant. In the past, all those who have become devotees have
possessed the products of the three gunas – the bhuts, the indriyas,
i Daivee hyeshã guna-mayee mama mãyã duratyayã|

Mãm-eva ye prapadyante mãyãm-etãm taranti te||
Bhagwad Gitã: 7.14

The Vachanãmrut

504

the antahkaran and their presiding deities. Thus, the answer to the
question is as follows: One who has the firm conviction of God – i.e.,
who has realised God completely by believing that there are no mãyik
qualities in His form and that that God transcends mãyã and the
products of mãyã, the three gunas – has transcended God’s mãyã.
Despite the fact that he has within him the products of the gunas of
mãyã – i.e., the bhuts, the indriyas, the antahkaran and their
presiding deities, each of which carries out its respective activities –
he is still said to have transcended mãyã. This is because even
though the products of mãyã are within him, he still realises that the
incarnate form of Shri Vãsudev Bhagwãn, who is worthy to be
worshipped by him, transcends the gunas of mãyã; thus, he himself
should also be known to have transcended mãyã.
5

“Even the scriptures acknowledge that the gunas seem to have
influenced all, including the deities such as Brahmã, etc., and the
rishis such as Vasishtha, Parãshar, Vishwãmitra, etc. Does that
imply that they cannot be called muktas? Also, does that imply that
they cannot be said to have transcended mãyã? In fact, they are all
muktas, and they have all transcended mãyã. If we do not answer in
this manner then there is no other possible solution to that question.
Thus this is the only answer.”

6

Then Nityãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, people go to seek the
refuge of God; what, then, are the characteristics of having the refuge
of God?”

7

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “God has said in the Gitã,

‚fl¸œ◊Ê¸ã¬Á⁄UàÿÖÿ ◊Ê◊∑¢§ ‡Ê⁄UáÊ¢ fl˝¡–
•„¢ àflÊ ‚fl¸¬Ê¬èÿÙ ◊ÙˇÊÁÿcÿÊÁ◊ ◊Ê ‡ÊÈø—H i
In this verse he says, ‘Abandon all other forms of dharma and
surrender only unto me. I shall deliver you from all sins, so do not
lament.’ One who has such a firm refuge of God, even if he were to
experience pain equivalent to that of final dissolution, he would not
believe anyone else to be his guardian against such misery except
God. Moreover, whatever happiness he wishes for, he seeks to attain
i Sarva-dharmãn-parityajya mãm-ekam sharanam vraja|

Aham tvã sarva-pãpebhyo mokshayishyãmi mã shuchaha||
Bhagwad Gitã: 18.66

The Vachanãmrut

505

only from God. That is, he does not consider anyone but God to be
the source of happiness. Moreover, he behaves only according to the
wishes of God. Such a person can be known to have taken refuge in
God. It is he who can be called a staunch devotee of God.”
8

Then Nãjã Bhakta asked, “How can one recognise a person who,
when he speaks, shows that he has faith in God like that of a devotee,
yet does not truly have the total refuge of God?”

9

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “Only after staying together and working
together can one recognise the strength or weakness of the faith of a
devotee of God. One who has little faith would become agitated and
find a path out of the Satsang fellowship. He would seek solitude
where he could engage in worship to his capacity, but he would not be
able to tolerate the pressures of living with the fellowship of devotees.
Thus, refuge of God is of three levels: highest, medium, and lowest.
Due to this, there are three levels of devotees.”

10

Thereafter, Nityãnand Swãmi asked, “Can a devotee who is of
the lowest level eradicate his deficiency and become a devotee of the
highest level in this very life, or not?”

11

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “Just as one performs the mãnsi pujã of
God, if one also performs the mãnsi pujã of the ideal Bhakta along
with God, by offering him the prasãd of God; and just as one prepares
a thãl for God, similarly, if one also prepares a thãl for God’s ideal
Bhakta and serves it to him; and just as one donates five rupees to
God, similarly, if one also donates money to the great Sant – then by
performing with extreme affection such similar service of God and
the Sant who possesses the highest qualities, even if he is a devotee of
the lowest type and was destined to become a devotee of the highest
type after two lives, or after four lives, or after ten lives, or after 100
lives, he will become a devotee of the highest calibre in this very life.
Such are the fruits of the similar service of God and God’s Bhakta.”
|| Vachanãmrut Vartãl-5 || 205 ||

Vartãl-6
Chimanrãvji’s Question
1

On Mãgshar vadi 11, Samvat 1882 [4 January 1826], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a dais in front of the
mandir of Shri Lakshminãrãyan in Vartãl. He was dressed entirely
The Vachanãmrut

506

in white clothes. Garlands of flowers had been placed around His
neck, and tassels of flowers were also hanging from His pãgh. At
that time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees from various
places had gathered before Him.
2

Thereupon Chimanrãvji asked, “Mahãrãj, initially, at the time
of dissolution, the jivas with their kãran bodies were absorbed within
mãyã. Then, at the time of creation, the jivas attained their sthul
and sukshma bodies. Also, a variety of life in the form of deities,
humans, animals, etc., was created. Was this due to karmas? Or
was it due to God’s wish? If we say that it was due to karmas, then
that would prove the Jain doctrine to be true. On the other hand, if
we say that it was due to God’s wish, then it would suggest that God
is biased and not compassionate. Therefore, please grace us by
telling us how things really are.”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj said, “You have not been able to ask the question
properly. The two types of bodies, sthul and sukshma, are both
intimately associated with the kãran body in the same way that a
tree is intimately associated with its seed. That is why it is called
the kãran body. This kãran body is a form of avidyã; it is without a
beginning; and it retains its sanchit karmas. Just as a seed and its
shell have an eternal relationship, and just as pruthvi and smell
have an eternal relationship, similarly, the jiva and the kãran body
have an eternal relationship. Just as when seeds which are planted
in the earth sprout upwards after coming into contact with
rainwater, similarly, during the period of creation, the jivas, which
had resided within mãyã together with their kãran bodies, attain
various types of bodies according to their individual karmas by the
will of God, the giver of the fruits of karmas.

4

“However, the Jains, who are nãstiks, claim that only karmas
are the cause of this, but they do not propound God as the giver of the
fruits of karmas. But, in reality, this belief of those nãstiks is wrong.
Therefore, if someone claims that kãl is the only influencing force,
then he is not correct. Or if someone claims that karma is the only
influencing force, then he is not correct. Or if someone claims that
God’s wish is the only influencing force, then even he is not correct.
Rather, the scriptures would propound the predominance of
whichever influence is predominant at that time; but that same
influence should not be accepted for all situations.

The Vachanãmrut

507

5

“This is because after the world was created, in the first Satyayug, everyone’s wishes came true, all were Brãhmins and a child
would be born merely by wishing for one mentally. There was a
kalpavruksh in every home, and all people worshipped only God.
Then, with the advent of Tretã-yug, people’s wishes were no longer
fulfilled; only when one went and stood under a kalpavruksh did one’s
wishes become fulfilled. Only after touching a woman would a child
be conceived. Thereafter, when Dwãpar-yug arrived, children were
born only after intercourse with a woman. In this manner, the ways
of Satya-yug and Tretã-yug are not to be found in all Satya-yugs and
Tretã-yugs; rather, they were found only in the first Satya-yug and
the first Tretã-yug.

6

“Therefore, when there is the predominance of favourable kãl, it
diminishes the power of the impure karmas of the jivas. Yet, when a
terrible famine strikes, everyone suffers; or when there is a
horrendous war, hundreds of thousands of people are killed at once.
In these cases were everyone’s favourable karmas suddenly exhausted
at the same time? Instead, it is the intense power of unfavourable
kãl that overcomes the force of the favourable karmas of the jivas.
So, when the influence of intense kãl prevails, karmas have no
influence; due to the influence of kãl, karmas that should have
resulted in happiness lead to misery, and karmas that should have
resulted in longevity lead to death. In this manner, when the
influence of a strong kãl is prevalent, everything occurs due to kãl.
So it is mentioned in the scriptures.

7

“However, when many people become ekãntik bhaktas of God,
then Satya-yug prevails even in Kali-yug. In these circumstances,
the scriptures propound the strength of the favourable karmas that
result from the ekãntik bhaktas doing bhakti of God, but the strength
of kãl is not mentioned.

8

“Without understanding this principle, those who believe in the
nãstik philosophy propound that only karmas are the cause of
everything; but they do not realise that that is in reference to the
strength of the karmas of ekãntik bhaktas of God; but karmas of nonbelievers are not said to have such strength. When God manifests
with the wish, ‘During this lifespan, I wish to grant liberation to all
jivas, worthy or unworthy, who come into contact with My form,’
then kãl and karma have no influence whatsoever. At that time, only
God’s influence prevails. When God assumed the avatãr of Krishna,
The Vachanãmrut

508

the evil Putnã tried to poison God; still, Shri Krishna Bhagwãn gave
her the same fate as his mother Yashodã. There were other evil
demons who came to kill God; yet even they were granted the highest
state of enlightenment by Shri Krishna Bhagwãn. Others were also
granted liberation according to the feelings by which they were
associated with Shri Krishna Bhagwãn. Thus, in those instances,
only God’s influence is said to be prevalent, but neither kãl nor
karma is said to have any influence. Therefore, one should interpret
situations according to the circumstances in which they occur.”
|| Vachanãmrut Vartãl-6 || 206 ||

Vartãl-7
The Characteristics of Godly and Demonic People;
Anvay-Vyatirek
1

On Mãgshar vadi 14, Samvat 1882 [7 January 1826], Shriji
Mahãrãj was sitting on a dais in front of the mandir of Shri
Lakshminãrãyan in Vartãl. He was dressed entirely in white
clothes. At that time, an assembly of paramhansas as well as
devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

In the assembly, the devotees were talking about God amongst
themselves wherein the topic arose that there are two types of people:
godly and demonic. Of these, godly people always become devotees of
God, whereas the demonic will always remain opposed to God.

3

Thereupon Chimanrãvji asked Shriji Mahãrãj a question:
“Mahãrãj, is there any possibility for a demonic person to become
godly?”

4

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “A demonic person most certainly does
not become godly. This is because he has a demonic disposition from
birth. Should such a person happen to somehow enter the Satsang
fellowship, he still does not lose his demonic disposition. Then, when
he leaves his physical body after staying in Satsang, he is absorbed
into Brahma and then emerges out again. Only after he does so
countless times is his demonic nature destroyed; otherwise, it is not
destroyed.”

5

Then Shobhãrãm Shãstri asked, “Mahãrãj, what is God’s anvay
nature, and what is His vyatirek nature?”
The Vachanãmrut

509

6

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “The principle of anvay-vyatirek is not
that God has become half anvay within mãyã and half vyatirek from
His abode; rather, God’s form is such that He is anvay within mãyã
and yet, at the same time, He is vyatirek. God is not afraid, ‘What if
I enter mãyã and thereby become impure?’ Instead, when God
associates with mãyã, even mãyã becomes like Akshardhãm; and if
He associates with the 24 elements2, then they also become
brahmarup. Hence, the Shrimad Bhãgwat states: œ
‘ ÊêŸÊ SflŸ ‚ŒÊ

ÁŸ⁄USÃ∑È§„U∑¢§ ‚àÿ¢ ¬⁄¢ œË◊Á„UH’i.

Likewise, there are countless such
statements which describe God’s form.
7

“For example, there is ãkãsh in the seed of a tree; and when a
tree grows from that seed, ãkãsh will still remain within all of its
branches, leaves, flowers and fruits in an anvay manner. Yet, when
the tree is cut, ãkãsh is not cut along with it; and when the tree is
burnt, ãkãsh is not burnt. In the same manner, God is anvay within
mãyã and the entities that have evolved from it; yet, He is also
vyatirek from it just like ãkãsh. This is the anvay-vyatirek nature of
God’s form.”
|| Vachanãmrut Vartãl-7 || 207 ||

Vartãl-8
A Spider’s Web
1

On Posh sudi 4, Samvat 1882 [12 January 1826], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a dais in front of the mandir of
Shri Lakshminãrãyan in Vartãl. He was dressed entirely in white
clothes. At that time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees from
various places had gathered before Him.

2

In the assembly, Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting in a meditative
posture and contemplating while some munis were singing devotional
songs to the accompaniment of a dukad and sarodã. He gave
i Dhãmnã svena sadã nirasta-kuhakam satyam param dheemahi||

We meditate upon God, who via His own form – ‘dhãm’ [i.e. divine light] –
destroyed the deception in the form of the products of mãyã; such is the
supremely satya form of God.
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 1.1.1

The Vachanãmrut

510

darshan in this manner for a short while. Then He opened His eyes
and, facing the assembly, said, “Everyone please listen as I wish to
speak to you. The vrutti of these eyes is formless; yet, if some solid
object comes in its way, that vrutti is obstructed. Thus, that vrutti
is actually gross and is composed predominantly of the element
pruthvi. When a devotee of God fixes that vrutti on God’s form,
initially the vrutti appears like a thin yellow rope. Just as a spider
stretches its web from one pillar to another, and then sometimes goes
to one pillar, then to the other pillar, or sometimes sits between the
two pillars, similarly, the jiva is like the spider; God’s form is one of
the pillars; one’s antahkaran is the other pillar; and the vrutti is the
web.
That is to say, through that vrutti, a meditating yogi
sometimes becomes absorbed in God’s form; at times he stays within
his own antahkaran; and at other times he stays between his
antahkaran and God.
3

“While doing this, when the yellow vrutti, which is composed
predominantly of the element pruthvi, becomes jal-predominant, it
appears to be white. When it becomes tej-predominant, it appears to
be red. When it becomes vãyu-predominant, it appears to be green;
and when it becomes ãkãsh-predominant, it appears to be dark.
Finally, when the vrutti sheds the predominance of the five bhuts
and becomes nirgun, it appears to be extremely radiant and assumes
the form of God.

4

“Therefore, one who tries to maintain his vrutti on God’s form in
this manner should remain perfectly pure. For example, when one
wishes to offer puja to a deity, the deity accepts the puja only after
one becomes as pure as the deity. Similarly, one who keeps his vrutti
on God’s form should, according to the method prescribed in the
Sãnkhya scriptures, realise his own self to be distinct from the three
bodies – sthul, sukshma and kãran; and only after attaining ãtmãrealisation, should he fix his vrutti on God’s form. While repeatedly
fixing his vrutti in such a manner, when his vrutti is eventually
absorbed into God’s form, that state has been defined as sleep for a
meditating yogi; but a yogi’s sleep is never like the state of being
eclipsed during deep sleep.”
|| Vachanãmrut Vartãl-8 || 208 ||

The Vachanãmrut

511

Vartãl-9
How Can One Experience the Nirgun Bliss of God?
1

On Posh sudi 8, Samvat 1882 [16 January 1826], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a cushion with a cylindrical
pillow that had been placed on a dais in front of the mandir of Shri
Lakshminãrãyan in Vartãl. He was dressed entirely in white
clothes. At that time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees from
various places had gathered before Him.

2

Then Shriji Mahãrãj asked the munis, “Just as one can
experience the three kinds of mãyik pleasures – rãjasik, tãmasik and
sãttvik – in the three states7, how can one experience the nirgun bliss
of God?”

3

All of the munis conferred amongst themselves in order to
answer the question, but they were unable to do so satisfactorily.

4

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Suppose there is ãkãsh alone,
without the other four bhuts – pruthvi, jal, etc. Also, suppose that in
that ãkãsh there are as many moons as there are stars. Then, the
intensity of that light would be equal to the intensity of the divine
light of Chidãkãsh. The form of God is always seated at the centre of
that Chidãkãsh.

5

“When one attains samãdhi of that form, then even if one
experiences it for only a moment, the person who is engaged in
worship feels, ‘I’ve enjoyed the bliss of God in samãdhi for thousands
of years.’ This is how one experiences the nirgun bliss of God’s form.
On the other hand, even if one indulges in mãyik pleasures for a long
time, ultimately one feels as if it was momentary. Therefore, the
nirgun bliss of God is eternal and imperishable, whereas the mãyik
pleasures are perishable.”
|| Vachanãmrut Vartãl-9 || 209 ||

Vartãl-10
How the Jiva Attains Liberation
1

On Posh sudi 11, Samvat 1882 [19 January 1826], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a cushion with a cylindrical
pillow which had been placed on a wooden cot under the neem tree in
the campus of the mandir of Shri Lakshminãrãyan in Vartãl. He
The Vachanãmrut

512

was dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, an assembly of
munis as well as devotees from various places had gathered before
Him.
2

Thereupon, Bhagubhãi Pãtidãr of the village Bhãdran arrived in
the assembly. He then asked Shriji Mahãrãj a question: “Mahãrãj,
how can the jiva attain liberation?”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj said, “God assumes an avatãr on this earth in
one of two forms – either in the form of a king or in the form of a
sãdhu. When He assumes an avatãr upon the earth as a king, He
possesses the 39 characteristics of a king8, and when He assumes an
avatãr upon the earth in the form of a sãdhu, He possesses the 30
characteristics of a sãdhu11.

4

“When God appears in the form of a king, He is adept in the 64
arts and skillsi ; the four methods of ruling – reconciling with one’s
enemies, suppressing one’s enemies, instigating divisions within
one’s enemies and punishing one’s enemies – as well as the nine
types of sentimentsii , such amorousness, etc. However, when God
appears in the form of a sãdhu, he does not have these
characteristics. When God is in the form of a king, then in times of
calamity He may even take to hunting to survive. He may punish
thieves by strangling them, and He may also keep many women in
His household. But in the form of a sãdhu, God strictly follows a
non-violent lifestyle; in fact, He would not even pluck a blade of green
grass. Also, He would not touch even wooden statues of women or

i The 64 types of arts and skills were a classical curriculum of sciences, arts, and

skills of cultured living that a member of a royal household would be expected to
know. They include: singing; magic and illusions; skills of cooking, eating and
drinking; drama and story-telling; gems and mining; knowledge of foreign
languages and dialects; impersonation; and knowledge of dhãrmic warfare and
victory, among others. Through these arts and skills, God, when incarnated as a
king, would have the behaviour and appearance no different from a king.
ii The nine types of sentiments are different dramatic moods meant to produce

their respective emotional effects: (1) shrungãr – amorous, (2) hãsya –
humourous, (3) karun – melancholy, (4) vir – heroic, (5) raudra – fierce,
(6) bhayãnak – horrific, (7) bibhatsa – vulgar, (8) adbhut – wondrous, (9) shãnt –
tranquil.

The Vachanãmrut

513

paintings of women. Thus, the behaviour of God in the form of a
sãdhu is not the same as that of God in the form of a king.
5

“The 39 characteristics of God’s avatãrs in the form of a king8 –
such as Shri Krishna, etc. – are listed in the first canto of the
Shrimad Bhãgwat through the dialogue between Pruthvi and
Dharma. The 30 characteristics of God’s avatãrs in the form of a
sãdhu11 – such as Dattãtreya, Kapil, etc. – are listed in the 11th canto
through the dialogue between Shri Krishna Bhagwãn and Uddhav.

6

“Thus, one who aspires for liberation should recognise God
through these characteristics and seek refuge of that God. One
should have complete faith in Him. One should perform His bhakti
while remaining within the framework of his injunctions. This is the
only means of attaining liberation.

7

“However, when God is not manifest on this earth, one should
seek the refuge of the Sant who has the realisation of God – because
the jiva can also attain liberation through him. When even such a
Sant is not present, one should keep firm faith in God’s murti and
perform bhakti while observing swadharma – because doing so can
also grant liberation to the jiva.”
|| Vachanãmrut Vartãl-10 || 210 ||

Vartãl-11
The Destruction of the Jiva; Love for the Satpurush
Is
the Only Means to Realising the Ãtmã
1

On Posh sudi Punam, Samvat 1882 [23 January 1826], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a cushion with a
cylindrical pillow that had been placed on a wooden cot under the
neem tree in the campus of the mandir of Shri Lakshminãrãyan in
Vartãl. He was dressed entirely in white clothes. He was also
wearing garlands of white flowers around His neck. In addition to
this, bunches of flowers were placed above His ears, and tassels of
flowers were also hanging from His pãgh. At that time, an assembly
of all of the munis as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “My nature is such that I feel
extremely afraid of harming any of the following: firstly, God;
The Vachanãmrut

514

secondly, a devotee of God; thirdly, a Brãhmin; and fourthly, one who
is meek. Other than these four, I am afraid of no one. This is
because even if one were to harm anyone else, one’s body would be
destroyed; the jiva would not be destroyed. However, if a person
harms one of these four, then his jiva is also destroyed.”
3

Hearing this, Muktãnand Swãmi questioned, “Mahãrãj, the jiva
is said to be indestructible; what, then, should one understand by its
‘destruction’?”

4

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “He would attain the body of a mountain
or any other similar object that has a jad form. Hence, that jiva
never attains liberation.
This should be understood as the
‘destruction’ of that jiva. Thus, anyone who aspires for his own
liberation should never harm any of these four.

5

“Also, one should never keep egotism of any sort before God or
His devotee. Why? Because egotism is the cause of anger, matsar,
jealousy and slander. In fact, even the bhakti of an egotist is said to
be demonic. Moreover, if a person oppresses a devotee of God, then
even if he himself is a devotee, he should be known to be a demon.
My nature is such that I detest even the sight of one who harms a
Brãhmin, a meek person or a devotee of God. Such a person will
never attain My company, either in this realm or in other realms.”

6

Having spoken in this manner, Shriji Mahãrãj asked for two
devotional songs to be sung. One was, ‘‹ÎflÎ Ëfl∞Â_ Ëı÷ fi ÿÌÁı flı, ÷ıfiı CÎıfl
ÂÌÿ …¥±ı...’i. The second was, ‘‹ÎflÎ ‰ËÎ·Î∞ Â_ ‰ËÎ·’ ÿÌÁı flı, ÷ıfi˘ Á_√ ÂÌÿ
÷∞±ı...’ii. He then gave a command that all satsangis should learn
these two devotional songs, and added, “One should constantly sing
these two devotional songs and remember their message.”

7

Thereafter, Shriji Mahãrãj got up and sat on a dais in front of
the mandir of Shri Lakshminãrãyan.

i Mãrã harjishu het na dise re, tene gher shid jaiye…

Why should one even visit the home of a person who has no love for my Lord?
ii Mãrã vãhãlãjishu vãlap dise re, teno sang kem tajiye…

Why should one forsake the company of a person who harbours love for my
Lord?

The Vachanãmrut

515

8

Gopãlãnand Swãmi then asked, “Why is it that despite reading
the Shãstras, the Purãns and other scriptures, the pundits of the
world still do not understand the greatness of God and the Sant as it
really is?”

9

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “Though such a person reads the
Shãstras and Purãns, he does not have the refuge of God. Thus, his
jiva has been overpowered by lust, anger, avarice, jealousy and
matsar; and the inner enemies in the form of lust, anger, etc., never
allow him to even raise his head. As a result, the pundits perceive
God and His Sant to be just like themselves. They think, ‘Just as
the inner enemies of lust, anger, etc., within us are never eradicated,
similarly, the same enemies are probably not eradicated from them
either.’ In this manner, they perceive faults in God and His Sant.
So, even though they read the Shãstras and Purãns, they fail to
realise the greatness of God and His Sant as it really is.”

10

Next, Shriji Mahãrãj posed a question to Dinãnãth Bhatt and all
of the munis: “The Satpurush, who is brahmaswarup, behaves above
the three bodies6 and the three states7; moreover, he does not believe
any of the actions of the 14 indriyas to affect him. However, an
ignorant person cannot realise this. Only when he attains a spiritual
state similar to that of the great Purush does he behave like the
great Purush, and only then does he understand the great Purush’s
behaviour. However, as long as one has not realised the greatness of
the Satpurush, one does not attain the state of being brahmaswarup;
yet, without ãtmã-realisation, one cannot realise the greatness of the
Satpurush. Hence, there seems to be a paradox. Now please explain
how this paradox can be reconciled?”

11

Everyone attempted to answer to the best of their ability, but no
one was able to give a solution to the question.

12

Then Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Here, allow Me to answer. The
answer is that when one develops intense affection for the Sant who
has realised the avatãr of God on this earth, then one never perceives
any kind of fault in the Satpurush. For example, when one has
strong affection for someone, one will never see the person’s flaws,
and one will always believe the person’s words. This is natural on
the worldly path and it is also natural on the path of liberation.
Therefore, intense love for the Satpurush is the only means to
realising one’s ãtmã; it is the only means to realising the greatness of
The Vachanãmrut

516

the Satpurush; and it is also the only means to having the direct
realisation of God.”
|| Vachanãmrut Vartãl-11 || 211 ||

Vartãl-12
Faith Coupled with the Knowledge of God’s
Greatness
1

On Posh vadi 2, Samvat 1882 [25 January 1826], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a decorated cot with a cushion
and cylindrical pillow on a wooden platform under the neem tree in
the campus of the mandir of Shri Lakshminãrãyan in Vartãl. He
was wearing a white khes and had covered Himself with a rosecoloured shawl over a white blanket. He had tied a white pãgh
around His head and was wearing a garland of roses around His
neck. At that time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees from
various places had gathered before Him.

2

In the assembly, Shriji Mahãrãj sat contemplating for quite
some time. He then opened His eyes and, looking compassionately at
the assembly of devotees, said, “Today I wish to talk to all of you
about faith in God, so please listen carefully. Shri Purushottam
Bhagwãn, whose form is forever divine, is seated in Akshardhãm,
which is as luminous as countless millions of suns, moons, and
flames of fire. That same God assumes the avatãrs of Rãm, Krishna,
etc., upon this earth for the sake of granting liberation to the jivas.
Then, the jiva that develops firm faith in that God by profoundly
associating with the Sant progresses spiritually day by day, just like
the waxing moon on the second day of the bright half of the lunar
month. As the sun’s effect on the moon increases, the waxing moon
continues increasing; finally, when Punam arrives, the moon
becomes full. Similarly, before developing total faith in God, the jiva
is as dim as the new moon of Amãs – only as bright as a glow-worm.
Then, as a person develops faith coupled with the knowledge of God’s
greatness, his jivãtmã progresses and becomes like the full moon of
Punam. Thereafter, his indriyas and antahkaran are no longer
capable of dislodging him from his faith. Regardless of the type of
action God performs, he does not perceive any fault in God. In
addition, one who has faith in God coupled with the knowledge of His
greatness becomes a fearless devotee.
The Vachanãmrut

517

3

“However, if at some time that same devotee harbours doubts in
the divine actions and incidents of God, either by the influence of
unfavourable places, times, company, scriptures, etc., or due to his
identification with the body, then his jiva, which was like the full
moon of Punam, becomes like the unlit moon of Amãs. Therefore,
some minor flaw in oneself will not really harm the jiva very much;
but if one somehow doubts the divine actions and incidents of God, or
if one somehow develops dislike for God, then that jiva instantly falls
from the path of liberation. Just as when the roots of a tree are cut,
the tree automatically becomes dry, similarly, a jiva who in any way
perceives faults in God can never stay without falling from the
Satsang fellowship.

4

“Moreover, one whose faith in God is weak, despite being in
Satsang, still doubts, ‘Who knows whether I will attain liberation or
not? When I die, will I become a deity? Or will I become a king? Or
will I become a ghost?’ One who does not have absolute faith in God
has such doubts. But one who does have absolute faith believes, ‘I
have attained liberation ever since the day I attained God; in fact,
whoever has my darshan or listens to my talks will also be freed
from all of his sins and will attain the highest state of
enlightenment.’
So, maintaining such faith coupled with the
knowledge of God’s greatness, one should believe oneself to be
fulfilled. All of you should constantly be aware of this fact.”

5

Then Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Please sing the following devotional
song describing God’s greatness: ‘‘L› T≤_ÿÎ‰fi‰ÎÁÌ ‰ÀfiÌ »Î›Î flı, F›Î_ ËÏfl
⁄ıÁ÷Î...’i.” Thereupon, that song was sung.

6

Then Shriji Mahãrãj said, “In the same manner as the song,
Shri Krishna Bhagwãn has also said in the Shrimad Bhãgwat:

•„UÙ •◊Ë Œflfl⁄UÊ◊⁄UÊÁø¸Ã¢ ¬ÊŒÊê’È¡¢ Ã ‚È◊Ÿ—»§‹Ê„¸UáÊ◊˜–
Ÿ◊ãàÿÈ¬ÊŒÊÿ Á‡ÊπÊÁ÷⁄UÊà◊ŸSÃ◊Ù˘¬„UàÿÒ ÃL ¡ã◊ ÿà∑Î§Ã◊˜H ii
i Dhanya Vrundãvanavãsi vatni chãyã re jyã Hari bestã…

Glorious are the shades of the banyan trees of Vrundãvan, where the Lord often
sat.
ii Aho amee devavarãmarãrchitam pãdãmbujam te sumanah-falãrhanam|
Namantyupãdãya shikhãbhir-ãtmanas-tamo’pahatyai taru-janma yat-krutam||

The Vachanãmrut

518

So, even one who is born as a tree becomes fulfilled by being
associated with God. In fact, even the tree under which God has sat
should be understood to be entitled to attain the highest state of
enlightenment.
7

“One who, in his heart, does not have such firm faith coupled
with the knowledge of God’s greatness should be known to be
impotent – no jiva is ever going to be uplifted by his words. For
example, a king who is impotent, and who is about to lose his
kingdom, and whose family line is about to cease, will still not be able
to beget a son with his wife. In fact, even if he summons impotents
like himself from his entire kingdom and allows them to associate
with his wife, she still will not beget a son. Similarly, no one attains
liberation by hearing even holy scriptures like the Gitã and the
Shrimad Bhãgwat from one who does not have faith in God coupled
with the knowledge of His greatness. Just as death is assured to
whoever drinks sweetened milk into which a snake’s venom has
fallen, similarly, no one can ever attain liberation by listening to the
Gitã or the Shrimad Bhãgwat from a person who does not have faith
in God coupled with the knowledge of His greatness. On the
contrary, only harm can come from it.”
|| Vachanãmrut Vartãl-12 || 212 ||

Vartãl-13
If Brahma Pervades, How Can It Possess a Form?
1

On Posh vadi 7, Samvat 1882 [30 January 1826], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a cushion with a cylindrical
pillow that had been placed on a wooden cot under the neem tree in
the campus of the mandir of Shri Lakshminãrãyan in Vartãl. He
had donned all white clothes upon His body and was also wearing
garlands of white flowers around His neck. In addition to this, a
decorated umbrella with a golden, egg-shaped top-piece had been
O these [trees] offer at your holy feet – which are worshipped by the chief deity
[Indra] and the immortals [i.e. other deities such as Brahmã, etc.] – fruits and
flowers, and bow before you with their heads [i.e. their branches and leaves] to
eradicate their darkness [of ignorance] which caused their birth as trees!
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 10.15.5

The Vachanãmrut

519

placed above His head. Shriji Mahãrãj sat adorned in such a
beautiful manner, tossing a pomegranate fruit in His hand. At that
time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees from various places
had gathered before Him.
2

Thereupon Bhagubhãi Pãtidãr of Bhãdran approached Shriji
Mahãrãj, and asked, “Mahãrãj, how does samãdhi actually occur?”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “God assumes an avatãr in Bharatkhand for the liberation of jivas. When He appears in the form of a
king, he possesses the 39 attributes of a king8; and when he appears
in the form of a sãdhu, such as Dattãtreya or Kapil, he possesses the
30 attributes of a sãdhu11. By appearance, God’s form appears
similar to that of any human; however, it is an exceptionally divine
form. For example, a magnetic rock appears similar to all of the
other rocks on the earth; yet there is an intrinsic magical property in
it – when a ship sails past a mountain of magnetic rock, then all of
the iron nails of the ship are drawn towards the magnetic rock.
Similarly, when a person does darshan of God’s form with shraddhã,
be it the form of a king or the form of a sãdhu, his indriyas are
drawn towards God. Then one attains samãdhi.

4

“Upon having the darshan of Shri Krishna Bhagwãn, all of the
residents of Gokul attained samãdhi; and in that samãdhi, God
showed them his own abode. In this manner, whenever there is an
avatãr of God, then at that time, God’s form definitely possesses
certain magical properties. Moreover, all of the indriyas of anyone
who does darshan of God with shraddhã are drawn towards God, and
he instantly enters samãdhi. At the same time, if God wishes to
attract many people towards Him, then even people who are not
devotees, and even animals, attain samãdhi upon seeing Him. So
what is so surprising about this happening to a devotee of God?”

5

Thereafter, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “It is generally said that
Brahma pervades everywhere. But how can something that is
pervasive be said to possess a form? Also, how can something that
possesses a form be called pervasive? That is my question.”

6

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “Brahma resides in only one place, but
not everywhere. That Brahma is Shri Krishna Bhagwãn; He is in all
places while still residing in only one place. For example, when a
person worships Surya, Surya grants the person a vision like his
own. Then, that person can see as far as Surya’s vision reaches.
Also, a person who has attained yogic powers can hear people who
The Vachanãmrut

520

may be thousands or millions of miles away as if they are speaking
next to him. In fact, he is able to pick up an object that may be
millions of miles away, even though his arms are the same size as
any other human’s. Similarly, when Shri Krishna Bhagwãn wishes
to give darshan somewhere, He gives His darshan there while still
residing in one place. Even though He has only one form, He appears
in countless forms. In fact, if a person who is a realised yogi has
extraordinary powers such as long-distance hearing and long-distance
vision, then what is so surprising about God also possessing such
powers?
7

“So, even though the scriptures describe God as pervasive, He
actually possesses a definite form. In those scriptures, He is
described as pervasive in the sense that using His own powers, He
gives His darshan to all while still residing in one place. But He is
not pervasive in the sense of being formless like ãkãsh. So, in reality,
God eternally possesses a form. It is that God with a definite form,
who, while always residing in Akshardhãm, appears in countless
millions of brahmãnds.”
|| Vachanãmrut Vartãl-13 || 213 ||

Vartãl-14
Whom a Non-believer Considers a Sinner Is Not
a Sinner, and Whom He Considers to be
Sincere in His Dharma Is Not Really So
1

On Posh vadi 9, Samvat 1882 [1 February 1826], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting in front of the mandir of Shri
Lakshminãrãyan in Vartãl. He was dressed entirely in white
clothes. At that time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees from
various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Rãmchandra Vãghmodiã of Vadodarã asked Shriji
Mahãrãj, “Mahãrãj, why does one who seems to be an unworthy
person still attain samãdhi?”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “Everyone believes that one who
infringes the dharma of one’s caste and ãshram as prescribed in the
scriptures is an ‘unworthy person’. However, if that unworthy
person sincerely appreciates the virtues of God and His Sant, he
earns great merits. As a result, the sins that he had committed by
The Vachanãmrut

521

transgressing the dharma of his caste and ãshram are eradicated,
and his jiva becomes extremely pure. Thereafter, when his mind is
fixed on God’s form, he attains samãdhi.
4

“Moreover, when a person abides by the dharma of one’s caste
and ãshram as prescribed in the Dharma-shãstras, everyone
considers that person to be one who is sincere in his dharma.
However, if he maligns God or His Sant, then the result of
committing the sin of maligning the Satpurush is such that all the
merits earned by abiding to the dharma of one’s caste and ãshram
are burnt to ashes. So, one who maligns the Satpurush is a worse
sinner than one who has committed the five grave sins10. This is
because he who has committed one of the five grave sins can be
redeemed of the sin by seeking the refuge of the Satpurush; but there
are no means to be redeemed for one who has maligned the
Satpurush. This is because when one goes to a place of pilgrimage,
one is freed of the sins one has committed elsewhere; but the sins
committed at a place of pilgrimage are totally irredeemable – it is as
if they are etched in iron.

5

“Thus, by seeking the refuge of the Satpurush, regardless of how
terrible a sinner a person may be, he becomes extremely pure and
attains samãdhi. On the other hand, a person who maligns the
Satpurush is still a terrible sinner, regardless of how sincere he may
seem to be in abiding by dharma; moreover, he can never have the
darshan of God in his heart. Therefore, whom a non-believer
considers to be a sinner is not a sinner, and whom he considers to be
sincere in his dharma is not really so.”
|| Vachanãmrut Vartãl-14 || 214 ||

Vartãl-15
The Reasons for Becoming Godly and Demonic
1

On Posh vadi 11, Samvat 1882 [3 February 1826], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a cushion with a cylindrical
pillow that had been placed on a dais under the neem tree in front of
the mandir of Shri Lakshminãrãyan in Vartãl. He was wearing a
dagli and a survãl made of kinkhãb. A rich, orange shelu with wide,
golden edges had been tied around His head, and another orange
shelu with very wide, golden edges rested upon His shoulder. In
addition to this, a decorated umbrella with a golden, egg-shaped topThe Vachanãmrut

522

piece had been placed over His head. At that time, an assembly of all
of the munis as well as devotees from various places had gathered
before Him.
2

Thereupon Shobhãrãm Shãstri asked a question: “Mahãrãj,
there are two types of jivas: godly and demonic. Have they always
been so since eternity, or have they become so due to association?”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “In the beginning, during the period of
dissolution, both types of jivas, godly and demonic, are absorbed
within mãyã. Then, when the cosmos is created, both types of jivas
emerge, each with its own nature. There are also those ordinary
jivas who become godly or demonic due to association with godly or
demonic jivas. Also, there are some godly and demonic jivas who
gradually develop such a nature due to the karmas they perform.

4

“But mainly, the cause of such godly and demonic natures is the
grace or the wrath of the Satpurush. For example, Jay and Vijay
were attendants of God, but since they maligned holy persons such as
the Sanakãdik, they attained a demonic nature. Prahlãdji, on the
other hand, was a demon, but since he imbibed the preaching of
Nãradji, he was known as an eminent devotee of God. Thus,
whomever the wrath of the great Purush falls upon, that jiva
becomes demonic; and whomever the great Purush is pleased upon,
that jiva becomes godly. There is no other reason for becoming godly
or demonic. Thus, one who desires to attain liberation should by no
means malign God or God’s Bhakta; rather, he should do only
whatever pleases God and God’s Bhakta.”
|| Vachanãmrut Vartãl-15 || 215 ||

Vartãl-16
Not Feeling Comfortable with Worldly Great Men
1

On Posh vadi 13, Samvat 1882 [4 February 1826], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a cushion with a cylindrical
pillow that had been placed on a dais under the neem tree in front of
the mandir of Shri Lakshminãrãyan in Vartãl. He was dressed
entirely in white clothes. At that time, an assembly of all of the
munis as well as devotees from various places had gathered before
Him.

The Vachanãmrut

523

2

Also sitting in the assembly was a pundit from Vadodarã. He
said, “Mahãrãj, if you show a miracle to some worldly, eminent man
then its impact will be very beneficial for the development of the
Satsang fellowship.”

3

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “I do not get along very well
with such worldly, eminent men. After all, they have pride of their
power and wealth, whereas I have pride of renunciation and bhakti.
Thus, neither is in a position to yield to the other. Even if I did send
some great man into samãdhi, then at most he would give some
village or a part of his kingdom, neither of which I have the slightest
desire for in My heart. Even if I were to wish for a village or a part of
a kingdom for the sake of happiness, still when I close My eyes and
contemplate upon God’s form, that bliss cannot be found even in a
kingdom consisting of the 14 realms.

4

“Besides, if there is as much bliss in ruling a kingdom as there
is in worshipping God, then why would great kings such as
Swãyambhuv Manu and others leave their kingdoms and go into the
forests to perform austerities? If there is as much bliss in women as
there is in worshipping God, then why would King Chitraketu
abandon 10 million women?

5

“Compared to the bliss of worshipping God, the bliss of the 14
realms is said to be like that of narak. Thus, one whose happiness is
based on the bliss of God feels that the pleasures of all of the vishays
in the entire brahmãnd are like narak. Even I feel that the bliss of
worshipping God is the only real bliss – everything else seems to be
full of misery. Hence, while worshipping God, if I encounter someone
who is naturally drawn into the Satsang fellowship, then I encourage
him; but there is no type of insistence in My heart. I only insist upon
engaging in the worship of God and keeping the company of devotees
of God. What I have disclosed before you is My deep-seated inner
belief.”
|| Vachanãmrut Vartãl-16 || 216 ||

Vartãl-17
An Enlightened Person Has Conquered His Indriyas
1

On Posh vadi Amãs, Samvat 1882 [6 February 1826], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a cushion with a
The Vachanãmrut

524

cylindrical pillow that had been placed in the haveli facing the
mandir of Shri Lakshminãrãyan in Vartãl. He was dressed entirely
in white clothes. At that time, an assembly of all of the sãdhus as
well as devotees from various places had gathered before Him.
2

Then Shriji Mahãrãj asked a question: “Each of the five gnãnindriyas and the five karma-indriyas have total knowledge of their
respective vishays. Furthermore, both an enlightened person and an
unenlightened person behave in the same manner through their
indriyas; i.e., the indriyas of the enlightened do not behave in a
different manner from those of the unenlightened. However, the
enlightened person is said to have conquered the indriyas; how can
this be so? That is the question.”

3

Muktãnand Swãmi replied, “It seems that a person conquers his
indriyas when he attains nirvikalp samãdhi.”

4

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Even one who has attained
nirvikalp samãdhi indulges in the panchvishays through the
indriyas just like everyone else; so how can he be said to have
conquered his indriyas?”

5

Muktãnand Swãmi made many attempts to answer the
question, but he was unable to give a satisfactory solution.

6

Then Shriji Mahãrãj said, “The answer is that he realises that
there is only misery in the panchvishays, i.e., sounds, touch, etc. He
also realises that there are only redemptive attributes in the form of
God. He even realises that by indulging in worldly vishays, the jiva
is condemned to the pits of narak, where he is compelled to suffer
terrible miseries. Having realised this, he develops an intense
aversion and a sense of enmity towards the panchvishays. There is
no way one will harbour affection towards something with which one
has such enmity. One who realises this, and then develops an
extreme aversion in his mind towards the panchvishays can be said
to have conquered his indriyas. Subsequently, he spends the rest of
his life offering bhakti to God in the form of listening to talks of God,
singing devotional songs, etc. But, unlike a non-believer, he does not
become attached to the panchvishays. Such a person is known to
have conquered his indriyas.”

7

Then Shriji Mahãrãj asked another question: “Suppose there is a
renunciant who has adopted the path of nivrutti. He realises himself
to be the ãtmã and does not believe his body to be his true form.
The Vachanãmrut

525

Also, his physical behaviour is rather eccentric and erratic. This
man does not harbour any vanity of gender, caste or ãshram. The
manner in which he eats, drinks, rises and sits is all rather
eccentric – it does not seem to match the norms of society. Such a
renunciant does not stay in anyone’s company; he is like a young
deer in a forest wandering alone in a carefree manner. In no way can
he be bound by anything.
8

“On the other hand, there is another renunciant who, despite
also having adopted the path of nivrutti, behaves in accordance with
the path of pravrutti. In fact, when he engages in pravrutti that
brings out vicious natures such as lust, anger, avarice, infatuation,
arrogance, matsar, desires, cravings, etc., in his heart, it even causes
some sort of disturbance in his heart. So, is it appropriate for such a
renunciant to continue following the path of pravrutti? If he does
remain on the path of pravrutti, how could he remain undisturbed?
If you say, ‘If he follows the path of pravrutti by God’s command then
he will not become attached to anything,’ then one can argue, ‘If one
drinks bhang by God’s command, does that mean he will not become
delirious? Of course, he will become delirious.’ How, then, can that
renunciant follow the path of pravrutti and not become attached to
anything? That is the question.”

9

Hearing this, Nityãnand Swãmi and Shuk Muni attempted to
give an explanation but were unable to present an accurate reply.

10

Then Shriji Mahãrãj said, “The renunciant who abides by
nivrutti dharma only and who behaves in an eccentric manner
should be known as one who has only the virtue of ãtmã-realisation.
On the other hand, the renunciant who has adopted nivrutti dharma
but also offers bhakti to God should vigilantly adopt the path of
pravrutti related to God and His devotees while staying within the
niyams prescribed by God. In fact, adopting the path of pravrutti in
order to serve God and His devotees is the very definition of bhakti.

11

“The renunciant who has adopted the path of nivrutti and who
has only the virtue of ãtmã-realisation can never be equal to the
renunciant who has adopted the path of pravrutti. This is because
although the latter is also a renunciant who has adopted the path of
nivrutti, he engages in pravrutti for the purpose of being able to serve
God and His devotees. Such a person should stay on the path of
pravrutti while abiding by the niyams prescribed by God. However,
he should never overdo or under-do his observance of those niyams.
The Vachanãmrut

526

While discarding vicious natures such as lust, anger, avarice,
infatuation, desires, cravings for taste, etc., he should follow the path
of pravrutti for the purpose of serving God and His devotees. As a
result, he will never become attached to anything. Compared to the
renunciant who has only the virtue of ãtmã-realisation, this
renunciant is far superior, and it is he who earns the grace of God.”
|| Vachanãmrut Vartãl-17 || 217 ||

Vartãl-18
Facts That Must Be Understood
1

After the evening ãrti on Mahã sudi 1, Samvat 1882 [7 February
1826], Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting on a cushion with a cylindrical
pillow that had been placed under the dome of the mandir of Shri
Lakshminãrãyan in Vartãl. He was dressed entirely in white
clothes. At that time, all of the paramhansas as well as devotees
from various places had gathered on all four sides around Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Seeing that you are all senior
paramhansas, I shall ask you a question: Which facts are essential
for a satsangi to understand? Because if someone were to ask him, or
if he were to experience a doubt in his own mind, then without
knowing these facts, how would he be able to find the solution?”

3

Having asked the question, Mahãrãj Himself continued, “Here, I
shall answer the question Myself. Firstly, one should realise that
ours is an Uddhav Sampradãy, and therefore, one should know its
customs.

4

“Secondly, one should know the line of succession of our gurus.
Specifically, Rãmãnand Swãmi was the form of Uddhav himself, and
in a dream, that same Rãmãnand Swãmi was initiated into the
Vaishnav fold by Rãmãnujãchãrya himself in Shrirangkshetra. So,
Rãmãnand Swãmi’s guru was Rãmãnujãchãrya, and I am
Rãmãnand Swãmi’s disciple. One should understand the succession
of gurus in this manner. In addition, one should understand the
tradition of the Dharmakul that I have established.

5

“Thirdly, one should know the authoritative scriptures of our
sampradãy, the names of which are: 1. The Vedas, 2. The Vyãs
Sutras, 3. The Shrimad Bhãgwat Purãn, 4. The Vishnu-sahasranãm
from the Mahãbhãrat, 5. The Bhagwad Gitã, 6. The Vidurniti, 7. The
The Vachanãmrut

527

Vãsudev Mãhãtmya from the Vishnu-khand of the Skand Purãn, and
8. The Yãgnavalkya Smruti.
One should know these eight
scriptures.
6

“Fourthly, one should know all of the niyams which are
prescribed for all satsangis.

7

“Fifth, one should understand Shri Krishna Bhagwãn, our
ishtadev, and also the variety of the forms of Shri Krishna Bhagwãn
due to varying locations, attendants and works.

8

“In addition, the manifest and the non-manifest form of Shri
Krishna Bhagwãn should be understood. He is non-manifest in the
sense that Shri Krishna Bhagwãn resides in Akshardhãm in the
midst of Golok, which transcends the darkness of mãyã. He has two
arms and is as luminous as millions and millions of suns, while he
himself has a dark complexion. Rãdhikãji and Lakshmiji are beside
him, and he is served by the attendants Nand, Sunand, Shridãmã,
etc. He is the cause of the creation, sustenance and dissolution of
countless millions of brahmãnds. He reigns as the supreme ruler of
everything. This God sometimes assumes a form with four arms;
sometimes, he assumes a form with eight arms; and he may even
assume a form with a thousand arms. He also assumes all of the
forms of the four emanations9, i.e., Vãsudev, Sankarshan, Aniruddha
and Pradyumna; as well as the 24 forms12, i.e., Keshav, etc. He also
manifests through avatãrs such as Varãh, Nrusinh, Vãman, Kapil,
Hayagriv, etc., while he himself actually always possesses two arms.
It is this same form that has been described in the Upanishads, the
Sãnkhya scriptures, the Yoga scriptures and the Panchrãtra. This is
how God’s form is described as being non-manifest.

9

“Furthermore, of all the ãchãryas that have lived, Vyãsji is the
greatest. Even Shankarãchãrya cannot be said to be like Vyãsji; in
fact, nor can Rãmãnujãchãrya, nor can Madhvãchãrya, nor can
Nimbãrk, nor can Vishnu Swãmi, nor can Vallabhãchãrya. This is
due to the fact that only if those ãchãryas accept the authority of
Vyãsji’s words will the words of those ãchãryas be accepted as
authoritative in the world, but not otherwise. However, Vyãsji
himself does not need to rely upon anyone else to be authoritative.
This is because Vyãsji is the ãchãrya of the Vedas and is himself an
avatãr of God. Therefore, we should abide by Vyãsji’s teachings only.

10

“That same Vyãsji, for the liberation of the jivas, separated the
Vedas into four parts, wrote the 17 Purãns and the Mahãbhãrat.
The Vachanãmrut

528

Still, he felt in his mind, ‘I have not been able to comprehensively
explain the methods for the liberation of the jivas.’ As a result, he
did not feel satisfied in his mind. So, he wrote the Shrimad Bhãgwat
Purãn, which is the essence of all of the Vedas, the Purãns, the
Itihãs scriptures, the Panchrãtra, the Yoga scriptures and the
Sãnkhya scriptures. In that Shrimad Bhãgwat, he has described
Shri Krishna Bhagwãn as greater than all of the other avatãrs, and
that it is that same Shri Krishna Bhagwãn from whom all of the
other avatãrs emanate.
11

“In the Guna-vibhãg chapter of the Shrimad Bhãgwat, Shri
Krishna Bhagwãn says to Uddhav, ‘I am nirgun, and whoever comes
into my contact also becomes nirgun.’ That is why all those who
came into contact with Shri Krishna Bhagwãn – with whichever
feeling – also became nirgun, regardless of whether it was a feeling of
lust, hatred, fear, kinship, or love. Thus, Shri Krishna Bhagwãn
himself is nirgun. This is how Vyãsji has described Shri Krishna
Bhagwãn. Also, Vyãsji has established the following principle: ‘Shri
Krishna Bhagwãn himself is the God who assumes all of the avatãrs,
and all other avatãrs are also his.’ If Shri Krishna Bhagwãn, instead
of being described as nirgun, is described as being merely the
embodiment of pure sattvagun, then one has not grasped the context
of the Shrimad Bhãgwat and it results in a major discrepancy. After
all, the gopis did not realise Shri Krishna Bhagwãn to be God; their
feeling of lust for Shri Krishna Bhagwãn was their method of worship
of him. Still, they became nirgun. How, then, can Shri Krishna
Bhagwãn be described as being merely the embodiment of pure
sattvagun? Therefore, Shri Krishna Bhagwãn is definitely nirgun.
In addition, Shri Krishna Bhagwãn himself has said to Arjun:

¡ã◊ ∑§◊¸ ø ÁŒ√ÿ◊fl¢ ÿÙ flÁ?Ê Ã?flÃ—–
àÿQ˜§flÊ Œ„¢ ¬ÈŸ¡¸ã◊ ŸÒÁÃ ◊Ê◊ÁÃ ‚Ù˘¡È¸Ÿ H i
12

“At the time of his birth, Shri Krishna Bhagwãn showed
Vãsudev and Devki his form with four arms so that they would
i Janma karma cha me divyam-evam yo vetti tattvataha|

Tyaktvã deham punar-janma naiti mãm-eti so’rjuna||
O Arjun! He who thoroughly realises my birth and actions to be divine will not
take another birth when he leaves his body; rather, he will attain me.
Bhagwad Gitã: 4.9

The Vachanãmrut

529

realise him to be God. He also showed Brahmã many forms with
four arms; he showed Akrur the form of Shesh-shãyi; and he showed
himself in the Vishwarup form to Arjun. In this manner, it is
justifiable to make distinctions in the modes of worship of Shri
Krishna Bhagwãn due to differences in his forms. However, his true
form is different. Because in Vraj, Shri Krishna Bhagwãn was
known as Bãlmukund; he was also called Murlimanohar and
Rãdhãkrishna; he used to take the cows and calves for grazing; he
lifted Mount Govardhan; he played rãs with the gopis; he came to
Mathurã and killed Kansa; he pleased the Yãdavs; he studied at the
home of the Brãhmin Sãndipani; he associated with Kubjã; he stayed
in Dwãrkãpuri, where he married eight chief queens such as
Rukmini, etc.; he also wedded 16,000 women; while staying in
Hastinãpur, he protected the Pãndavs from all of the calamities
which fell upon them; he saved Draupadi from humiliation; he
became Arjun’s charioteer, etc. In this manner, there were many
divine incidents of Shri Krishna Bhagwãn due to differences in
locations. But from this, one should not make distinctions in the
modes of worship of Shri Krishna Bhagwãn’s two-armed form. One
who does should be known as a blasphemer of the guru and the
guru’s word.
13

“In fact, Shri Krishna Bhagwãn has behaved in many different
ways. He has eaten the leftovers of the gopas and has even played
rãs with the gopis. However, Shri Krishna Bhagwãn’s devotees
should not imitate his behaviour. Rather, they should behave
according to the characteristics of a sãdhu and abide by the dharma
of one’s caste and ãshram. They should offer bhakti to him as
prescribed by Shri Krishna Bhagwãn in the 11th canto of the Shrimad
Bhãgwat, the Bhagwad Gitã and in the Vãsudev Mãhãtmya. But
none should behave as Shri Krishna Bhagwãn behaved. One who
does so is an outcast and is not My satsangi.

14

“Just as one should not imitate the behaviour of our ishtadev
Shri Krishna Bhagwãn, similarly, as I am your spiritual master,
your guru and your preceptor, you should not imitate My physical
behaviour. Instead, all of you should behave according to My words
in the form of the respective injunctions which I have prescribed for
those in My sampradãy; but none should imitate My behaviour.

15

“All paramhansas and all satsangis should learn these facts
which I have told you. After understanding them, all should behave
The Vachanãmrut

530

accordingly. Also, when speaking with others, you should tell them
to behave similarly.”
16

Having said this, Shriji Mahãrãj left for dinner. Upon hearing
this discourse, all of the sãdhus and satsangis understood that the
non-manifest form of Shri Krishna Bhagwãn whom Shriji Mahãrãj
spoke of is none other than this Shriji Mahãrãj, son of Bhakti and
Dharma, and that no one transcends Him. It is only He who is our
Ishtadev, and it is only He who is our guru.
|| Vachanãmrut Vartãl-18 || 218 ||

Vartãl-19
Becoming a Devotee of God; Indiscretion
1

On the evening of Mahã sudi 2, Samvat 1882 [8 February 1826],
Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting on a cushion with a cylindrical pillow that
had been placed in the eastern roopchoki of the mandir of Shri
Lakshminãrãyan in Vartãl. He was dressed entirely in white
clothes. At that time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees from
various places had gathered before Him.

2

Then, after the evening ãrti had finished, Shriji Mahãrãj said,
“Please listen, I wish to speak to all of you about God. Whenever a
jiva attains a human body in Bharat-khand, God’s avatãrs or God’s
sãdhus will certainly also be present on earth at that time. If that
jiva can recognise them, then he becomes a devotee of God.

3

“Once he has become a devotee of God, it would be improper for
him to bear affection for anything except God. This is because,
compared to the bliss of the abode of God, the pleasures of worldly
vishays are like excreta. Only worms that live in excreta feel that
there is profound bliss in excreta – a human would realise excreta to
be nothing but utter misery. Thus, one who has recognised God
becomes an attendant of God. Thereafter, he should not cease to be
an attendant of God by desiring to enjoy the pleasures of worldly
vishays like worms in excreta.

4

“Also, whatever a devotee of God wishes for comes true.
Therefore, it is his great indiscretion when he, out of ignorance,
desires any object other than God. That is why a devotee of God
should consider the pleasures and delights of the 14 realms to be like
the excreta of a crow. He should bear strong affection – by thought,
The Vachanãmrut

531

word and deed – only towards God and God’s Bhakta. He should
believe, ‘If, perhaps, a devotee of God has some desires remaining in
him other than those of God, he will still attain the status of Indra or
will attain Brahmalok, but unlike worldly people, he will certainly
not pass through the cycle of births and deaths or go to narak. If
that is so, then how can one describe the greatness of God and the
bliss enjoyed by a true devotee of God?’ Therefore, a devotee of God
should maintain deep affection only for God.”
|| Vachanãmrut Vartãl-19 || 219 ||

Vartãl-20
King Janak’s Understanding
1

On Mahã sudi 3, Samvat 1882 [10 February 1826], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a cushion with a cylindrical
pillow that had been placed on a square platform under the neem tree
in the darbãr of the mandir of Shri Lakshminãrãyan in Vartãl. He
was dressed entirely in white clothes. Garlands of chameli flowers
had also been placed around His neck. In addition to this, a red
umbrella made from fine, silken cloth had been placed over His head.
At that time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees from various
places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj asked the paramhansas a question:
“Lust evolves from rajogun, and anger and avarice evolve from
tamogun. So, which one spiritual endeavour totally uproots the seeds
of lust, etc.?

3

Shuk Muni replied, “The seeds of lust and other such vices are
burnt from one’s heart only when one attains nirvikalp samãdhi and
when one realises the ãtmã.”

4

Hearing this, Shriji Mahãrãj raised a doubt: “Did not Shiv,
Brahmã, Shrungi Rishi, Parãshar and Nãrad have nirvikalp
samãdhi? All were overcome by lust. However, despite their
attainment of nirvikalp samãdhi, when the vruttis of their indriyas
reverted outwards, they were overcome by lust, anger, etc. For this
reason, what you have said cannot be the answer to the question. In
fact, just as an enlightened person remains undisturbed in nirvikalp
samãdhi, an unenlightened person also remains undisturbed in deep
sleep. When the vruttis of the indriyas revert outwards, both are
The Vachanãmrut

532

disturbed by lust, anger, etc. Thus, there does not seem to be any
distinction between the enlightened and the unenlightened. Now,
other paramhansas may try to answer the question.”
5

Thereafter, Gopãlãnand Swãmi, Devãnand Swãmi, Nityãnand
Swãmi and Muktãnand Swãmi collectively attempted to answer the
question according to their understanding, but they could not give a
satisfactory solution to Shriji Mahãrãj’s question.

6

Then Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Janak the Videhi followed the path of
pravrutti, and yet he was undisturbed. For example, when a female
sannyãsi named Sulbhã came into Janak’s court, King Janak told
Sulbhã, ‘Though you are trying to seduce my mind, by the grace of
my guru Panchshikh Rishi, I have mastered the doctrines of both
Sãnkhya and Yoga. So, even if half of my body is anointed with
sandalwood paste and the other half is slashed with a sword, both
would be the same to me. Even if my Mithilãpuri were to burn down,
still nothing of mine would be burned. Thus, even though I have
adopted the path of pravrutti, I am still unaffected and undisturbed.’
This is what King Janak said to Sulbhã. Also, King Janak was said
to be the guru of even Shukji.

7

“Therefore, the answer to the question is as follows: One’s
indriyas may be directed outwards and one may be on the path of
pravrutti, but if in one’s heart one has a firm understanding like that
of King Janak, then one will in no way become disturbed by lust,
anger, etc.

8

“After a person has thoroughly known that which needs to be
known – that this is true and this is false – he realises that except
God’s form, all worldly forms are full of terrible miseries, and that
they are all perishable. Also, he realises himself to be the ãtmã,
distinct from his body, his indriyas and his antahkaran. After this,
there is no object that would be strong enough to seduce him. This is
because he sees all worldly forms as worthless. So, even if all of the
indriyas of a person in whose heart such understanding has become
firmly rooted were to extend outwards on the path of pravrutti, still
he would not be disturbed by lust, anger, etc.

9

“The seeds of lust, anger, etc., in the heart of such a devotee of
God will be destroyed, whether he is a renunciant or a householder.
Also, of all of the devotees of God, he is the best Vaishnav. So, being
a renunciant or a householder is of no significance; rather, he whose
The Vachanãmrut

533

understanding is greater should be known as being a greater devotee
than the rest.
10

“The mistakes of Shiv, Brahmã, etc., were mentioned only to
illustrate that regardless of whether they had deficiencies in this
understanding or not, when they encountered adverse places, times,
company, actions, etc., even they were disturbed by lust, anger, etc.
Therefore, even if one has such understanding, one should under no
circumstances associate with any type of evil influence. This is a
universal principle.”
|| Vachanãmrut Vartãl-20 || 220 ||

|| End of Vartãl Section ||

AMDÃVÃD SECTION
Amdãvãd-1
Miraculous Meditation
1

On Mahã vadi 11, Samvat 1882 [4 March 1826], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting facing west in the mandir of Shri
Narnãrãyan in Amdãvãd. He was dressed entirely in white clothes.
Garlands of roses adorned His neck, bunches of roses had been placed
upon His ears, and tassels of roses also decorated His pãgh. At that
time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees from various places
had gathered before Him.

2

In the assembly, Shriji Mahãrãj sat introspecting. He then
opened His eyes, looked at the assembly, and said, “I wish to talk to
all of you about a particular type of meditation that has also been
described in the Moksh-dharma. I have seen many great people who
have attained enlightenment through this type of meditation. In
fact, even in My experience, among the countless types of meditation,
there is none comparable to the particular type of meditation that I
The Vachanãmrut

534

wish to tell you about now. Just as a miraculous mantra or medicine
is intrinsically miraculous, similarly, the type of meditation I wish to
describe to you also has an intrinsically miraculous nature by which
one instantly attains enlightenment.
3

“Now I shall describe that meditation. One who performs this
meditation should meditate on the sun in the right eye and meditate
on the moon in the left eye. Then, while meditating in this way, the
sun and moon begin to appear in the eyes exactly as they are in the
sky. As a result, the right eye begins to heat up, and the left eye
begins to cool down. Thereafter, the sun should be envisioned in the
left eye and the moon in the right eye. After visualising in this
manner, the sun and moon should be visualised within one’s
hrudayãkãsh. In addition, the form of one’s own jiva, the observer,
should also be seen. One should also meditate on God – who resides
within the observer, i.e., within one’s own jiva. At that point, one’s
body which is full of worldly desires is felt to rotate in the sky, like a
pulley mechanism used for drawing water from a well.

4

“Eventually, a person who meditates in this manner attains the
darshan of God’s Vishwarup form, within which he also sees the
system of the 14 realms. That form is not seen as being extremely
large; it is seen in the same way that Mãrkandeya Rishi saw the
entire brahmãnd in the stomach of the child form of God sleeping on
the leaf of a banyan tree.

5

“Having meditated in this way, one is able to see everything that
is described in the scriptures. Thereafter, all remaining nãstik
feelings within one’s jivãtmã are resolved, and the jiva becomes
extremely powerful. In addition, one develops a firm conviction that
whatever is stated in the scriptures is true. The eight yogic powers15,
namely subtleness, etc., become accessible to one who performs this
meditation, and one’s vision reaches as far as the rays of the sun and
moon reach. In this manner, countless yogic powers manifest before
that person, but because he is a devotee of God, he does not accept
any of those powers. Instead, he meditates only on God. As a result,
the performer of this meditation attains enlightenment like Nãrad,
the Sanakãdik and Shukji. Thus, there are countless varieties of
meditation, but only this meditation grants instant enlightenment.”

6

After Shriji Mahãrãj concluded this description, Muktãnand
Swãmi asked, “Is this meditation attained only by one who practises
The Vachanãmrut

535

the prãnãyãm of ashtãng-yoga, or can it be attained by others as
well?”
7

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “It does not matter whether one
practises prãnãyãm or not. Only if one practises this meditation and
is an ekãntik bhakta of God can one perfect it; other people, however,
are unable to tread this path. Therefore, for those who are eligible for
this meditation, there is no alternative method for instantly
becoming enlightened other than the method of meditation that I
have just described.”
|| Vachanãmrut Amdãvãd-1 || 221 ||

Amdãvãd-2
Performing Puja after Washing and Bathing
1

On Fãgun sudi 11, Samvat 1882 [20 March 1826], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a cushion with a cylindrical
pillow that had been placed on a wooden cot on a square platform in
front of the mandir of Shri Narnãrãyan in Amdãvãd. He was
wearing a white khes and had covered Himself with a white cotton
cloth. He had also tied a pink feto with dangling tassels of roses
around His head. Two bunches of roses had been inserted above His
ears, and garlands of roses adorned His neck as well. In addition to
this, strings of roses had been tied around His arms as well as His
wrists. In this manner, His entire body had been decorated with
roses. At that time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees from
various places had gathered before Him.

2

Then, addressing all of the paramhansas, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “I
would like to ask you a question. Suppose there is a devotee of God
who behaves above the influence of wakefulness, dream and deep
sleep. He has shed the influence of polluted rajogun, tamogun and
sattvagun, and acts within pure sattvagun. That is how he worships
God. Another devotee behaves under the influence of the three
gunas, but nevertheless, he does have intense love for God. Of these
two devotees, who is better?”

3

Thereupon the sãdhus replied, “The one with love for God is
better.”

4

Shriji Mahãrãj then questioned, “Now consider the following:
One person performs puja of God after washing, bathing and
The Vachanãmrut

536

becoming pure; and another performs puja in an impure state. Of
these two, who is better?”
5

The munis replied, “The person who performs puja after
becoming pure is better.”

6

Hearing this, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “You claim that one who
worships God after overcoming mãyik influences is inferior and that
one who expresses love for God with mãyik influences is superior.
But how is he superior?”

7

Since no one could answer the question, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Of
the four types of devoteesi described in the Gitã, Shri Krishna
Bhagwãn has called only the one possessing gnãn his own ãtmã.
Therefore, one who, having discarded mãyik influences, becomes
brahmarup and then worships God is the best devotee.

8

“Why? Because nitya-pralay is the jiva’s deep sleep. Nimittapralay is Brahmã’s deep sleep. Prãkrut-pralay is that in which all of
the entities that had evolved from Prakruti are assimilated back into
Prakruti. In ãtyantik-pralay, which is gnãn-pralay, everything up to
and including Prakruti is eclipsed by the light of Brahma.
Furthermore, in nitya-pralay, all of the jiva’s adjuncts are absorbed;
in nimitta-pralay all of ishwar’s adjuncts are absorbed; and in
prãkrut-pralay all of Purush’s adjuncts are absorbed. However,
when the creation process is initiated, all three are again engulfed by
their respective adjuncts.

9

“But a person who has overcome mãyik influences by way of
ãtyantik-pralay, also called gnãn-pralay, is never engulfed by those
adjuncts again. If at any time he does assume a physical body, then
just like God assumes a body by His own will, he also assumes a body
by his own will; he does not assume a body due to kãl, karma or
mãyã.

10

“Therefore, the one who worships God after becoming
brahmarup is definitely superior. Only one who is a faithful devotee

i The four types of devotees described in the Gitã (7.16 & 7.17) are: (1) ãrta – one

who is distressed from having fallen from the path of attaining yogic powers, and
thus still wishes to attain them; (2) jignãsu – one who seeks knowledge of the
ãtmã, i.e., ãtmã-realisation; (3) arthãrthi – one who desires material objects, i.e.,
material pleasures and powers; and (4) gnãni – one who has gnãn.

The Vachanãmrut

537

of God and possesses the characteristics of an ekãntik bhakta can
understand this fact.”
|| Vachanãmrut Amdãvãd-2 || 222 ||

Amdãvãd-3
The Implanted Branch of a Banyan Tree; Upsham
1

On Fãgun vadi 2, Samvat 1882 [25 March 1826], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot that had
been placed on the platform facing the mandir of Shri Narnãrãyan in
Amdãvãd. A pink pãgh, decorated with garlands of roses and
chameli flowers, adorned His head. At that time, an assembly of
munis as well as devotees from various places had gathered before
Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj asked the entire muni-mandal, “All
jivas are dependent upon the panchvishays. Either they physically
indulge in them, or if physical association is not possible, they think
of them within the antahkaran – but the jiva is unable to remain for
even a moment without thinking about or indulging in the
panchvishays.

3

“Now take the example of a banyan tree. Everyone knows that
the roots of a banyan tree keep the tree green. Even if all of its roots,
except for a few minor roots, are uprooted, the banyan tree will still
remain green. In the same way, one may have outwardly renounced
the panchvishays, but if thoughts of them are entertained, then those
thoughts become a cause of births and deaths. The question, then, is
how can these panchvishays not become a cause of births and deaths
for a devotee of God?”

4

Muktãnand Swãmi attempted to answer the question but was
unable to offer a satisfactory reply.

5

So Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Here, I shall answer the question.
When a devotee contemplates upon the form of God while behaving as
the ãtmã, i.e., independent of the traits of the three bodies6, which
are engulfed in mãyã, then by the power of that contemplation of
God, he behaves in a state of upsham. Then, due to the power of that
upsham, the panchvishays do not become a cause of births and
deaths.
The Vachanãmrut

538

6

“Consider the following analogy: When rivers like the Mahi or
the Sãbarmati are in full flow between their two banks, even
elephants, horses and trees are all carried away; nothing is able to
remain stationary. Similarly, for a person in the upsham state,
regardless of how enticing the objects presented before the indriyas
are, when he focuses his attention within, they are forgotten, just as
those vishays seen in past lives are forgotten in this life. Such
behaviour of a devotee is known as upsham.

7

“Such upsham is indeed extremely important. Suppose an
ignorant man and woman who are engaged in worldly life, and who
have intense love for each other before marriage are then married
and made to stay awake and walk continuously for three days and
nights. Then when they are united, due to their fatigue, they will be
incapable of enjoying the pleasure of each other’s beauty or touch.
Even if they embrace each other, they would sleep like logs tied
together, but would not experience any enjoyment from the
panchvishays. So if they have no awareness of the vishays due to
upsham attained by ignorance during deep sleep, then how can the
panchvishays bind the enlightened person who attains the state of
upsham by the meditation of God’s form? They certainly do not bind
him. Therefore, the panchvishays are not a cause of births and
deaths for one who has attained upsham.”

8

Thereupon Nityãnand Swãmi commented, “The method You
have described for attaining the state of upsham, i.e., meditating
upon God after ãtmã-realisation, is very difficult. Please tell us if
there is another, easier method apart from that.”

9

Shriji Mahãrãj said, “A devotee of God who, firstly, deeply
understands the greatness of God; and secondly, does darshan of God
and serves Him and His Bhakta with extremely intense shraddhã,
attains that upsham state.

10

“Yet, it appears to Me that an egotistical servant will not be
liked by anyone. To have an egotistical servant serve one is like
when during a famine, even the rich survive by eating kodrã; having
an egotistical servant to serve one is similar to this. The master is
not as pleased with an egotistical servant as much as he is with a
humble servant. Therefore, he who does whatever pleases the master
is a true servant.”

11

Shuk Muni then asked, “How can one without wisdom and
understanding please his master?”
The Vachanãmrut

539

12

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “Even though Mulji Brahmachãri and
Ratanji are not extremely intelligent, they have an intense yearning
for liberation. So they do indeed know how to do whatever pleases
God.

13

“Also, currently, even the paramhansas and the sãnkhya-yogi
and karma-yogi satsangis do not behave as per My liking as do all of
the Ayodhyãwãsi men and women. Why? Because the Ayodhyãwãsis
have totally dedicated their lives for the Satsang fellowship.
Therefore, nobody knows how to please God like the Ayodhyãwãsis.
Moreover, these Ayodhyãwãsis are extremely trusting; a cunning
person can cheat them. Therefore, if they wish to commence any
activity, they should be allowed to do so only after consulting the
senior paramhansas and senior satsangi householders. But they
should not be allowed to do that activity based on the word of a single
person. In this manner, the renunciants and householder satsangis
should look after the Ayodhyãwãsis. This is My order.”
|| Vachanãmrut Amdãvãd-3 || 223 ||

|| End of Amdãvãd Section ||

The Vachanãmrut

540

The Vachanãmrut

541

GADHADÃ III SECTION
Gadhadã III-1
The Inclinations of Gnãn and Affection
1

On Vaishãkh vadi 11, Samvat 1882 [1 June 1826], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a cushion with a cylindrical
pillow that had been placed upon a beautifully coloured, decorated cot.
The cot rested on the high veranda outside the west-facing rooms in
the courtyard of the mandir of Shri Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã
Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white
clothes. Beautiful tassels of mogrã flowers decorated the large, white
pãgh that was tied around His head. Also, a garland of mogrã
flowers hung around His neck, and a string of flowers decorated His
wrists. At that time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees from
various places had gathered before Him.

2

Then Shriji Mahãrãj asked the paramhansas, “What is the
understanding of a devotee who, despite facing adverse
circumstances, experiences no setbacks in his bhakti towards God?”

3

The paramhansas replied according to their understanding, but
they were unable to provide a satisfactory reply.

4

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “One who worships God needs,
firstly, firm vairãgya; and secondly, the virtue of ãtmã-realisation. If
vairãgya is lacking, then when one obtains desired objects, one will
also develop love for those objects in the same way that one has love
for God. If the virtue of ãtmã-realisation is lacking, then when the
body experiences pain or pleasure, that devotee’s vruttis become
disturbed.
Then, he develops love for anything one considers
pleasurable and an aversion for anything he considers to be full of
misery. In this way, his mind becomes polluted. Therefore, a
devotee of God needs extremely firm realisation of the ãtmã as well as
extremely firm vairãgya.

5

“Why? Because, by vairãgya, all worldly forms except for God’s
form are negated; and through ãtmã-realisation, worldly pleasures
and miseries are negated. A person who does not have the virtues of
The Vachanãmrut

542

ãtmã-realisation and vairãgya, even though he has attained nirvikalp
samãdhi, experiences happiness and peace only while he remains in
samãdhi.
But when he comes out of samãdhi, then, like
Nãrãyandãs, on seeing pleasurable objects, he becomes attracted to
them.”
6

Thereafter Shriji Mahãrãj said, “A devotee of God either has an
inclination of gnãn or an inclination of affection towards God. Of
these, one who has the inclination of gnãn understands the profound
greatness of God, and one with an inclination of affection for God
cannot stay without God even for a moment. Jhinãbhãi, Devrãm and
Prabhãshankar, for example, have an inclination of gnãn. Such
devotees who understand the greatness of God should be known as
having an inclination of gnãn. A devotee who has affection for God
like the gopis of Vraj should be known as having an inclination of
affection.

7

“Of these, one who has the inclination of gnãn realises God as
being antaryãmi and believes, ‘God does not make judgements based
on what He hears from others. Instead, God recognises a devotee’s
inclination and speaks to him accordingly, but He does not act based
on others’ advice.’ Conversely, one who believes, ‘God rebukes me
based on someone else’s words, even though I am not at fault,’ has no
gnãn of God.

8

“Even in worldly life we notice that a person who has selfish
motives of gaining something from another will never see the other
person’s faults. Why? Because his affection is based on self-interest.
Similarly, if a person has self-interest in mind that God will free him
from the fear of births and deaths, then he will never perceive faults
in God. But one who attributes faults in God by thinking, ‘God
changes His stand based on the prompting of others,’ has neither the
inclination of gnãn nor the inclination of affection.”

9

Having said this, Shriji Mahãrãj said to the senior
paramhansas, “Please reveal which of these two is your inclination.”

10

All of the paramhansas replied, “We have the inclination of
gnãn.”

11

Then Shriji Mahãrãj continued, “A person who has an
inclination of affection will do for his loved one even that which is not
fit to be done. For example, in the world, thieves have affection for
their wives and children. Yet, when they go to steal, they kill other
The Vachanãmrut

543

people and pass on the money to their own family. In reality that
thief is quite merciless, but since he has affection for his own family,
he is not merciless towards them. Similarly, one who has affection
for God and His devotees can never become angry on or jealous of God
or His devotees, and in no way does he attribute faults to them. One
who has such affection can be said to have the inclination of affection.
One with neither the inclination of gnãn nor the inclination of
affection is said to be confused.”
12

Having delivered this discourse, Shriji Mahãrãj returned to His
residence.

13

On the evening of that same day, Shriji Mahãrãj was seated on a
cushion with a cylindrical pillow placed on a decorated cot on the
veranda outside the east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr. He
was dressed entirely in white clothes. He had also worn a garland of
mogrã flowers around His neck. At that time, some sãdhus were
singing devotional songs to the accompaniment of a dukad and
sarodã, while munis as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him in an assembly.

14

When the sãdhus had finished singing, Shriji Mahãrãj
addressed the assembly: “The Shikshãpatri which I have written
should be read daily by all of My followers – renunciant sãdhus and
brahmachãris, as well as all male and female householders. Those
who do not know how to read should listen to it daily; and those who
do not have the facility to listen to it should worship it daily. I have
stated this in the Shikshãpatri itself. One should observe a fast on
the day one fails to do any of the three. This is My command.”

15

Thereupon everyone resolved to observe this command of Shriji
Mahãrãj by saying, “O Mahãrãj, we will do as You have said.”

16

Hearing this, Shriji Mahãrãj became extremely pleased. He
embraced all of the sãdhus and brahmachãris and imprinted His
holy footprints on the chests of all of the satsangis.
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III-1 || 224 ||

The Vachanãmrut

544

Gadhadã III-2
The Attainment of All Purushãrths;
Incarnate God in the Form of the Guru
1

On the evening of Jyeshtha sudi 6, Samvat 1882 [11 June 1826],
Swãmi Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a low, wooden seat
in the courtyard of the mandir of Shri Vãsudevnãrãyan in Dãdã
Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was wearing a white khes and
had covered Himself with a white cotton cloth. He had also tied a
black-bordered, white pãgh around His head. Tassels of mogrã
flowers had been inserted in that pãgh. At that time, an assembly of
munis as well as devotees from various places had gathered before
Him.

2

Then Shriji Mahãrãj posed a question: “One sees that the world
is perishable and that the chaitanya separates from the body and
leaves it; yet, the predominance of the world does not diminish from
one’s heart. Despite thoroughly believing God to be an ocean of bliss,
one’s mind still does not focus on God. Also, satsang does not become
predominant in one’s heart, and one cannot eradicate love for wealth,
women and other pleasures of the world. What can be the reason for
this?”

3

Thereupon Muktãnand Swãmi replied, “The person lacks
vairãgya; as a result, he cannot eradicate the predominance of the
world from his heart, nor can he develop love for God.”

4

Shriji Mahãrãj then clarified, “It is true that there is a
deficiency in vairãgya, but it appears to Me that the inclination
which forms as one practises satsang, remains as it is forever; i.e., a
different inclination does not develop. By practising satsang, that
inclination may be nourished, but the inclination itself remains
unchanged. Whenever a person’s inclination is being formed, his
mind becomes disturbed in the process of formation. Just as the
mind of an extremely lustful person is disoriented by lust, and the
mind of an extremely angry person is disoriented by anger, and the
mind of an extremely greedy person is disoriented by greed, similarly,
a person’s mind becomes disoriented in the process of developing his
inclination. Then, during that disturbance, whichever inclination
develops is the inclination that remains. Therefore, one who is wise
should realise one’s own inclination. Because when one is disturbed
The Vachanãmrut

545

by the influence of lust, anger, etc., if one contemplates upon one’s
own inclination, the influence of lust, anger, etc., is lessened.
5

“In addition, just as a householder feels repentant if he
experiences lustful thoughts on seeing his attractive mother, sister or
daughter, similarly, one should feel repentant when objects other
than satsang become predominant in one’s heart. If one does not feel
similarly remorseful on entertaining thoughts for indecent objects,
then satsang does not remain predominant in one’s heart.

6

“In fact, the fruit of all spiritual endeavours is satsang. In the
11th canto of the Shrimad Bhãgwat, Shri Krishna Bhagwãn says to
Uddhav, ‘I am not as pleased by ashtãng-yoga, thoughts of sãnkhya,
scriptural study, austerities, renunciation, yoga, sacrifices,
observances, etc., as I am pleased by satsang.’ In fact, it appears to
Me that all sanskãrs one has gathered from previous lives have been
attained through association with the Satpurush. Even today, those
who obtain sanskãrs do so through association with the Satpurush.
One who has attained the association of such a Satpurush, but is still
unable to understand matters as they really are should be known to
have an extremely dull intellect.

7

“As for Me, I consider this assembly of satsangis to be far greater
than the assemblies in Shwetdwip, Golok, Vaikunth and
Badrikãshram; and I see all of these devotees as being extremely
luminous. Indeed, I swear by this assembly of sãdhus that there is
not even the slightest untruth in this matter. Why do I have to
swear in this manner? Because not everyone understands such
divinity, nor can they see it; that is why I have to swear.

8

“Thus, even after attaining this satsang – which is rare for even
Brahmã and others – affection for objects other than God still
remains because the person has not developed as firm a conviction for
the manifest form of God as he has for the non-manifest form of God.
That is why the Shrutis state: ‘If a person develops conviction in the
guru – who is the manifest form of God – in the same way that he
has conviction in the non-manifest deities, then, as a result, he
attains all of the arthas i which are described as attainable.’ In fact,
when he attains the company of such a Sant, he has, while still alive,
i Here ‘arthas’ should be understood as ‘purushãrths’ – dharma, arth, kãm and

liberation.

The Vachanãmrut

546

attained He who was to be attained after death. That is to say, he
has attained that which is called the highest state of enlightenment,
or liberation, while being alive.
9

“What I have just explained to you may appear to be simple, but
in reality, it is extremely subtle. One who is currently behaving in
this manner will understand that this is extremely subtle; but others
will not even be able understand it. That is how subtle it is.”

10

After delivering this discourse, Shriji Mahãrãj bid ‘Jai
Sachchidãnand’ to everyone and then returned to His residence.
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III-2 || 225 ||

Gadhadã III-3
Compassion and Affection
1

On Ãshãdh vadi 1, Samvat 1883 [20 July 1826], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was at His residence in Dãdã Khãchar’s
darbãr in Gadhadã. On that day, Harji Thakkar invited Shriji
Mahãrãj to sanctify his house. There, he had Shriji Mahãrãj sit on a
cushion with a cylindrical pillow on a decorated cot on the veranda
outside the east-facing rooms. He then performed puja of Shriji
Mahãrãj with sandalwood paste mixed with saffron and other
auspicious offerings. In this way Shriji Mahãrãj sat facing east and
was dressed entirely in white clothes. Garlands of mogrã flowers
adorned His neck, strings of flowers adorned both arms, and tassels
of flowers beautifully decorated His pãgh. At that time, an assembly
of munis as well as devotees from various places had gathered before
Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj asked the entire sãdhu-mandal,
“Compassion and affection reside instinctively in the heart of a
devotee of God. Of the two, the nature of affection is like honey; i.e.,
it sticks everywhere. The nature of compassion is that one feels
compassion towards everything. When Bharatji felt compassion for a
deer, he had to take birth from the womb of a deer in his next life.
Moreover, one who is compassionate undoubtedly develops affection
towards those for whom one has compassion.

3

“There are two methods for eradicating compassion and
affection: ãtmã-realisation and vairãgya. Of these, ãtmã-realisation
is such that nothing else can penetrate it. The nature of vairãgya is
The Vachanãmrut

547

that it shows all objects to be perishable. Therefore, through ãtmãrealisation and vairãgya, compassion and affection are destroyed. In
addition, the influences of the sthul, sukshma and kãran bodies, as
well as all other influences are destroyed, and then, only
brahmasattã remains. But thereafter, does a devotee harbour
compassion and affection for God and His devotees? Or does he not?
That is the question.”
4

Muktãnand Swãmi, Shuk Muni, Nityãnand Swãmi and other
paramhansas answered according to the extent of their
understanding, however, none could give a satisfactory reply to Shriji
Mahãrãj’s question.

5

So Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Here, allow Me to answer. The answer
is that by gnãn and vairãgya, the chaitanya is freed from the mãyik
influences of the three bodies6, the three states7 and the three gunas.
It is then characterised by pure existence, and not even the slightest
trace of mãyik influence remains. Consider, for example, the analogy
of an oil lamp’s flame. Only when a wick-holder, some oil and a wick
unite can the flame of an oil lamp be seen and recognised. But, when
the combination of these three components is broken, the flame can
no longer be seen by anyone, nor can it be recognised by anyone.
Only when those components are combined is it seen and recognised.
Similarly, when all mãyik influences are overcome by gnãn and
vairãgya, the jivãtmã remains as pure brahmasattã.

6

“Now, the jivãtmã is imperceptible to the mind and speech, and
it is not perceivable by any of the indriyas either. However, if, with
time, it attains the knowledge of God by associating with a pure
sampradãy, and it fully understands the greatness of God and His
devotees, then it is freed from all mãyik influences. Thereby, that
jivãtmã also becomes brahmarup. Nevertheless, compassion and
affection for God and His devotees do still remain forever. To carry
the analogy of the oil lamp further, when the combination of its
components is broken, its flame remains within the air, where it
cannot be perceived by any of the indriyas. However, the fragrance
or foul smell that had pervaded that flame is not destroyed. In
actuality, the air is even more aloof than the flame, yet it becomes
pervaded by fragrant or foul smells. Likewise, by gnãn and vairãgya,
the jivãtmã is freed from mãyik influences, but the impression of
satsang is not lost. Even though it becomes brahmarup – like
Nãrad, the Sanakãdik and Shukji – it behaves with intense
The Vachanãmrut

548

compassion and affection for God and His devotees. The following
verses illustrates this:

¬Á⁄UÁŸÁDÔUÃÙ˘Á¬ ŸÒªÈ¸áÿ ©U?Ê◊o£Ù∑§‹Ë‹ÿÊ–
ªÎ„UËÃøÃÊ ⁄UÊ¡·¸ •ÊÅÿÊŸ¢ ÿŒœËÃflÊŸ˜H i
„U⁄UªÈ¸áÊÊÁˇÊåÃ◊ÁÃ÷¸ªflÊŸ˜ ’ÊŒ⁄UÊÿÁáÊ—–
•äÿªÊã◊„UŒÊÅÿÊŸ¢ ÁŸàÿ¢ ÁflcáÊÈ¡ŸÁ¬˝ÿ—H ii
and ‘•Êà◊Ê⁄UÊ◊Êp ◊ÈŸÿÙ ...H’iii and ‘¬˝ÊÿáÊ ◊ÈŸÿÙ ⁄UÊ¡Ÿ˜...H’iv. The Gitã also
states:

i Parinishthito’pi nairgunya uttama-shloka-leelayã|

Gruheeta-chetã rãjarshe ãkhyãnam yad-adheetavãn||
O King [Parikshit]! Despite being perfectly poised in the nirgun state, I
[Shukdevji] – having been attracted by the divine actions and incidents of God –
studied the [Shrimad Bhãgwat] epic.
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 2.1.9
ii Harer-gunãkshipta-matir-bhagavãn bãdarãyanihi|
Adhyagãn-mahad-ãkhyãnam nityam vishnu-jana-priyaha||
Honourable [Shukdevji] – son of Vyãs, and to whom devotees of Vishnu are very
dear – was attracted by the virtues of God, and thus constantly studied the great
[Shrimad Bhãgwat] epic.
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 1.7.11
iii Ãtmãrãmãsh-cha munayo…||
Despite being engaged [only] in the ãtmã [i.e. having attained ãtmã-realisation]
and despite having overcome all base natures – the munis [still] offer selfless
bhakti to God [because] God possesses such [divine] qualities.
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 1.7.10
iv Prãyena munayo rãjan…||
O King [Parikshit]! [Although] the munis had no need for the rules of moral
conduct and had attained the nirgun state, they [still] engaged themselves in
extolling the glory of God.
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 2.1.7

The Vachanãmrut

549

’˝rÊÔ÷ÍÃ— ¬˝‚ÛÊÊà◊Ê Ÿ ‡ÊÙøÁÃ Ÿ ∑§ÊæU˜ˇÊÁÃ–
‚◊— ‚fl¸·È ÷ÍÃ·È ◊jÁQ¢§ ‹÷Ã ¬⁄UÊ◊˜H i
7

“In this manner, many verses promote the view that devotees of
God who, by gnãn and vairãgya, have shed mãyik influences and
have become brahmarup, still have compassion and affection for God
and His devotees. On the other hand, one who is not a devotee of
God, and who, by ãtmã-realisation and vairãgya alone, has overcome
mãyik influences and behaves as the ãtmã has been influenced
during the process of God-realisation by the evil influence of those
who have only ãtmã-realisation and are devoid of upãsanã of God.
Consequently, he does not develop compassion and affection for
devotees of God. Just as a foul smell lingers in the air and in fire,
similarly, the impressions of evil company, which cannot be overcome
by any means, linger within him.

8

“For example, Ashwatthãmã was brahmarup, but he was
influenced by evil company. Therefore, he did not develop compassion
or affection for Shri Krishna Bhagwãn or his devotees, the Pãndavs.
Similarly, the impressions of evil company do not disappear in a
person who has only knowledge of the ãtmã, even though he becomes
brahmarup; nor does he develop compassion and affection for God and
His devotees. Conversely, for a devotee of God, even though mãyik
influences are overcome, intense compassion and affection for God
and His devotees increase. But in no way are compassion and
affection ever lost; they always remain.”

9

After delivering this discourse, Shriji Mahãrãj bid ‘Jai
Sachchidãnand’ to everyone and then returned to His residence.
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III-3 || 226 ||

i Brahma-bhootaha prasannãtmã na shochati na kãnkshati|

Samaha sarveshu bhooteshu mad-bhaktim labhate parãm||
One who has become brahmarup remains joyful, grieves nothing, desires
nothing, behaves equally with all beings, and attains my supreme bhakti.
Bhagwad Gitã: 18.54

The Vachanãmrut

550

Gadhadã III-4
Bãdhitãnuvrutti
1

On Shrãvan sudi 3, Samvat 1883 [6 August 1826], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting facing north on a cushion with a
cylindrical pillow that had been placed on the veranda outside the
medi of His residence in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He
was dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, an assembly of
munis as well as devotees from various places had gathered before
Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Even though a devotee of God
may possess gnãn and vairãgya, and even if by the force of a thought
process the devotee has overcome affection for worldly objects that
cause him bondage, until he attains nirvikalp samãdhi,
bãdhitãnuvrutti still lingers within.

3

Until a devotee of God – even though he may possess gnãn and
vairãgya, and by the force of a thought process has overcome affection
for worldly objects that cause him bondage – attains nirvikalp
samãdhi, bãdhitãnuvrutti lingers within him. Due to this, he
doubts, ‘Maybe attachment for my mother, father, wife, children,
wealth, relatives, body or property still remains!’ He remains fearful
in this manner. For example, a brave warrior, even though he has
killed all of his enemies, still occasionally becomes frightened by even
those dead enemies; in fact, even if he sees them in his dreams, he
becomes frightened. Similarly, due to bãdhitãnuvrutti, even a
devotee possessing gnãn is afraid of the bondage of worldly objects
that he has negated as false from within and from which he has
severed all affection. Or, if, at some time, he remembers the money
he possessed, or his wife or other objects, he becomes fearful in his
mind and thinks, ‘What if they cause bondage?’ In this manner, the
recalling of objects that have been falsified from within is called
bãdhitãnuvrutti.

4

“Bãdhitãnuvrutti is overcome when nirvikalp samãdhi is
attained.
Then, that person becomes oblivious of eating and
drinking, day and night, pain and pleasure. But thereafter, when he
withdraws from nirvikalp samãdhi and enters savikalp samãdhi,
bãdhitãnuvrutti still lingers. As a result of the influence of that
bãdhitãnuvrutti, when that devotee contracts a fever or is at the
moment of death, he sometimes recalls other objects besides God. At
The Vachanãmrut

551

that time, he may babble meaninglessly; he may even say words like,
‘O mother! O father!’ Hearing this, a person who does not
understand the nature of bãdhitãnuvrutti, will perceive faults in that
devotee by thinking, ‘He was called a devotee of God; yet why does he
speak like this at the time of death?’ Such faults are attributed
without knowing the nature of bãdhitãnuvrutti.
5

“In this world, many sinful people die with full consciousness.
Also, a soldier or a Rajput who has injured his body may die while
being fully conscious. That being so, will a non-believer who dies
with full consciousness still attain liberation, despite being a nonbeliever? Of course not; he will certainly be consigned to narak.
Conversely, regardless of whether a devotee of God dies in a disturbed
state due to the influence of bãdhitãnuvrutti or while engaged in the
chanting of God’s name, that devotee still reaches the holy feet of
God.”

6

On the evening of that same day, Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting on
the veranda outside the medi of His residence. He was dressed
entirely in white clothes. At that time, an assembly of sãdhus as
well as devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

7

Shriji Mahãrãj then asked the senior paramhansas, “Please
describe how the jiva, which resides within the body, is present in
one location, and how it pervades the entire body.”

8

The paramhansas answered according to their understanding,
but none were able to satisfactorily answer Shriji Mahãrãj’s question.

9

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “In the body, just as food is
transformed into semen, similarly, in the heart, there is a
transformation of the five mahãbhutsi into a disc of flesh, within
which the jiva resides. The jiva clings to this disc of flesh like a
torch made of rags that is set alight after being immersed in oil.
Also, just as fire pervades an iron nail, similarly, the jiva actually
resides in the disc of flesh, and by consciousness pervades the entire
body. Therefore, regardless of where pain is felt in the body, it is the
jiva itself that feels the pain; so, in fact, the jiva cannot be said to be
separate from the pleasures and pains of the body.

i

All references to ‘mahãbhuts’ in this Vachanãmrut actually refer to
‘panchbhuts’.

The Vachanãmrut

552

10

“However, some may argue, ‘The jiva is luminous, whereas the
disc of flesh and the body have no light. So how can they be said to
have combined?’ The answer to this is that just as without the
combination of oil, a wick-holder and a wick, a flame cannot remain
aloft in space on its own, similarly, without associating with the disc
of flesh – which is a transformation of the five mahãbhuts – the jiva
cannot remain alone. Just as fire – which is distinct from the
container, the oil and the wick – cannot be destroyed by breaking just
the container, in the same way, the jiva, even though it pervades the
disc of flesh and the body, does not die with the death of the body.
Although the jiva does experience pleasure and pain along with the
body, it is not perishable like the body. So, the jiva is indestructible
and luminous, and it also pervades the body.

11

“Furthermore, if an oil lamp is placed at one location in a
mandir, its flame predominantly pervades the wick, and secondarily,
it also pervades the entire building. In the same manner, the
jivãtmã also predominantly resides in and pervades the disc of flesh
that is a product of the five mahãbhuts; and secondarily, it resides in
and pervades the entire body. This is how the jiva resides within the
body. Moreover, God resides within the jiva as a witness.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III-4 || 227 ||

Gadhadã III-5
Bhakti Coupled with the Knowledge of
God’s Greatness
1

On Bhãdarvã sudi 11, Samvat 1883 [12 September 1826], Shriji
Mahãrãj was sitting on a cushion with a cylindrical pillow on the
veranda outside the west-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in
Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white clothes. He was also
wearing a garland of mogrã flowers around His neck. Tassels of
mogrã flowers decorated His pãgh, and strings of mogrã flowers
adorned His wrists. At that time, an assembly of the muni-mandal
as well as devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Then Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Someone please ask a question.”

3

Thereupon Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, of the various
types of bhakti offered to God, which type of bhakti does not encounter
any obstacles, and which type does encounter obstacles?”
The Vachanãmrut

553

4

In reply, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “In the third canto of the Shrimad
Bhãgwat, within the Kapil Gitã, Mother Devhuti says to Kapilji,

ÿÛÊÊ◊œÿüÊfláÊÊŸÈ∑§ËÃ¸ŸÊlà¬˝„U˜fláÊÊlàS◊⁄UáÊÊŒÁ¬ ÄflÁøÃ˜–
EÊŒÙ˘Á¬ ‚l— ‚flŸÊÿ ∑§À¬Ã ∑§Õ¢ ¬ÈŸSÃ ÷ªflÛÊÈ Œ‡Ê¸ŸÊÃ˜H i

•„UÙ ’Ã E¬øÙ˘ÃÙ ª⁄UËÿÊŸ˜ ÿÁîÊ„U˜flÊª˝ flÃ¸Ã ŸÊ◊ ÃÈèÿ◊˜–
Ã¬ÈSÃ¬SÃ ¡È„ÈUflÈ— ‚FÈ⁄UÊÿÊ¸ ’˝rÊÔÊŸÍøÈŸÊ¸◊ ªÎáÊÁãÃ ÿ ÃH ii
The greatness of God is described in these two verses. Also, Kapilji
describes his own greatness to Mother Devhuti by saying:

◊jÿÊmÊÁÃ flÊÃÙ˘ÿ¢ ‚Íÿ¸SÃ¬ÁÃ ◊jÿÊÃ˜–
fl·¸ÃËãº˝Ù Œ„UàÿÁªA◊Î¸àÿÈp⁄UÁÃ ◊jÿÊÃ˜H iii

i Yan-nãmadheya-shravanãnukeertanãd-yat-prahvanãd-yat-smaranãd-api

kvachit|
Shvãdo’pi sadyaha
darshanãt||

savanãya

kalpate

katham

punas-te

bhagavan-nu

O Lord! If even a ‘shwapach’ [i.e. a vile person who eats dog-meat] becomes
immediately suitable for performing yagnas [i.e. is perfectly purified] by merely
hearing and repeating the name of God, by bowing to God and by remembering
God, then what [can be said] of your darshan?
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 3.33.6
ii Aho bata shvapacho’to gareeyãn yaj-jihvãgre vartate nãma tubhyam|
Tepus-tapas-te juhuvuhu sasnur-ãryã brahmã-noochur-nãma grunanti ye te||
How amazing! Even a ‘shwapach’ [i.e. a vile person who eats dog-meat] becomes
great if your name is on the tip of his tongue [i.e. he chants God’s name].
Indeed, those who chant your name are the ones who have performed all
austerities, performed all yagnas, bathed [in the sacred waters of all the places of
pilgrimage], studied all the Vedas; and they indeed are the ‘ãryas’ [i.e. the noble
ones].
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 3.33.7
iii Mad-bhayãd-vãti vãto’yam sooryas-tapati mad-bhayãt|
Varshateendro dahatyagnir-mrutyush-charati mad-bhayãt||

The Vachanãmrut

554

One who has bhakti for God coupled with such knowledge of His
greatness encounters no obstacles in any form. On the other hand,
one who offers bhakti without realising the greatness of God,
perceiving worldly attributes in Him, does encounter obstacles.”
5

Muktãnand Swãmi then asked, “By what means can such
bhakti coupled with the knowledge of God’s greatness be developed?”

6

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “Bhakti coupled with the knowledge of
God’s greatness arises in one’s heart by serving and profoundly
associating with eminent sãdhus like Shukji and the Sanakãdik.”

7

Thereafter Shuk Muni asked, “One devotee of God is such that
his faith in God is perfect, and disturbances such as lust, anger,
avarice, infatuation, etc., do not arise in his heart. A second devotee
is such that his faith in God is perfect, but swabhãvs such as lust,
anger, avarice, infatuation, etc., do cause a disturbance within.
When these two types of devotees leave their bodies, do they attain
the same level of bliss in the abode of God, or do they attain different
levels of bliss?”

8

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “If a devotee of God whose faith is perfect
and who is not disturbed by lust, anger, avarice, etc., desires
anything other than the manifest form of Shri Krishna Bhagwãn,
then, even if he is a great renunciant and has firm vairãgya and
intense ãtmã-realisation, he will attain a lower level of bliss. As for
the other devotee, even though he also has perfect faith in God, when
lust, anger, avarice, infatuation, etc., cause disturbances within, he
feels remorse within his heart. But, except for the manifest form of
Shri Krishna Bhagwãn, he wishes for no other object. Then, even if
he has only a slight amount of ãtmã-realisation and vairãgya, such a
devotee still attains profound bliss in the abode of God after leaving
his body.

9

“Why is this? Because the former devotee superficially appears
to be a renunciant and free of other desires. But since he inwardly
desires to attain ãtmã-realisation and other things, he is called a
‘sakãm devotee’. In the higher realms, he will certainly attain less
bliss. Conversely, the second devotee superficially appears to be a
It is by fear of me that the wind [Vãyu] blows, Surya [i.e. the sun] shines, Indra
[i.e. the clouds] rains, Agni [i.e. fire] burns, and death [Yam] devours [the living].
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 3.25.42

The Vachanãmrut

555

‘sakãm devotee’, but inwardly, that devotee wishes for nothing except
the form of God. If a desire for pleasures other than the form of God
arises, he feels intense remorse in his mind. Therefore, he is called a
‘nishkãm devotee’. When such a devotee leaves his body, he attains
profound bliss, becomes an attendant of God, and develops intense
love for the form of Shri Krishna Bhagwãn.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III-5 || 228 ||

Gadhadã III-6
The Friendship between the Mind and the Jiva
1

On Bhãdarvã vadi 5, Samvat 1883 [21 September 1826], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting in His residence in Dãdã
Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white
clothes. At that time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees from
various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj looked compassionately at all of the
devotees and said, “If a devotee of God engages in delivering spiritual
discourses, singing devotional songs, listening to talks of God, and
the rest of the nine types of bhakti with jealousy towards other
devotees, then God is not very pleased by that bhakti. But if, having
discarded jealousy, one offers bhakti only for one’s own liberation and
not to display to other people, then God is pleased by that bhakti.
Therefore, one who wants to please God should not offer bhakti to
please other people or out of jealousy for someone, but should do so
only for one’s own liberation.

3

“If, while offering bhakti to God, one commits a mistake, one
should not blame someone else for that fault. Indeed, it is the very
nature of all people that when they are at fault, they claim, ‘I made a
mistake because someone else misled me; but I am not really at
fault.’ One who says this, though, is an utter fool. After all, others
may say, ‘Go and jump into a well!’ Then, by such words, should one
really jump into a well? Of course not. Therefore, the fault lies only
in the person who does the wrong, but he blames others nonetheless.

4

“Similarly, to blame the indriyas and antahkaran is the
foolishness of the jiva. Because in reality, the jiva and the mind are
close mutual friends. Their friendship is like the friendship between
milk and water. When milk and water are mixed and heated on a
The Vachanãmrut

556

fire, water settles below the milk and itself burns, but it does not
allow the milk to burn. To save the water, the milk overflows and
extinguishes the fire. Such is their friendship. The jiva and the
mind have a similarly close friendship.
So, the mind never
entertains thoughts of things that the jiva does not like. Only when
the jiva likes something does the mind attempt to persuade the jiva.
How does it attempt to persuade it? Well, when the jiva is
meditating on God, the mind suggests, ‘You should also meditate on
some female devotee of God.’ The mind then makes the jiva
contemplate on all of her features. Then, it forms indecent thoughts
about her just as it forms indecent thoughts about other women.
5

“But, if the devotee’s jiva is extremely pure, he will not accept
the arguments of the mind, and he will, instead, feel intense remorse.
Thereafter, the mind will never entertain such thoughts again.
Conversely, if his jiva is polluted and sinful, it will accept the
arguments of the mind. Then, by making the devotee repeatedly
entertain indecent thoughts, the mind will make him fall from the
path of liberation. For this reason, a sincere aspirant develops
intense hatred for talks of adharma – which are contrary to the path
of liberation – regardless of whether they are suggested by his own
mind or by some other person. Then, his own mind or the other
person will not reappear in an attempt to persuade him.

6

“Furthermore, because the mind is a friend of the jiva, it will
never entertain thoughts which the jiva does not like. So, when
indecent thoughts are formed in the mind, if the jiva becomes
extremely furious with it, such thoughts will never arise in the mind
again. Thus, when indecent thoughts repeatedly arise in the mind,
the devotee should understand it to be the fault of his own jiva, not
the fault of his mind alone.

7

“If a person offers bhakti to God with this understanding, the
evil influence of some non-believer or his own mind will not be able to
affect him even slightly. Thereby, he will be able to worship God
without any obstacles.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III-6 || 229 ||

The Vachanãmrut

557

Gadhadã III-7
An Iron Nail
1

On Bhãdarvã vadi 6, Samvat 1883 [22 September 1826], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a cushion with a
cylindrical pillow at His residence in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in
Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white clothes. He was wearing
garlands of mogrã flowers around His neck, and tassels of mogrã
flowers also decorated His pãgh. At that time, an assembly of munis
as well as devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said to all of the devotees, “I shall now
tell you My innermost principle. For a person who desires his own
liberation, nothing in this world is more blissful than God and His
Sant. Therefore, just as a person is profoundly attached to his own
body, he should be similarly attached to God and His Sant. One
should also remain absolutely loyal to the Bhakta of God. But in no
way should one abandon one’s loyalty to God and His Bhakta, even if
while keeping that loyalty one’s reputation increases or decreases, or
one is honoured or insulted, or one lives or dies. In addition, one
should not allow an aversion to develop towards them. Furthermore,
one should not have as much affection towards one’s body or bodily
relations as one has towards the Bhakta of God. For a devotee who
behaves in this manner, even extremely powerful enemies such lust,
anger, etc., are unable to defeat him.”

3

Continuing, Shriji Mahãrãj then said, “God, who possesses a
definite form, is always present in His abode, Brahmapur. Devotees
of God, who also possess a form, remain in His service in that abode.
Therefore, one who has taken firm refuge in the manifest form of God
should not harbour the following fear in one’s mind: ‘What if I
become a ghost or an evil spirit, or attain the realm of Indra or the
realm of Brahmã after I die?’ One should not harbour such doubts in
one’s mind.
After all, a devotee of God who possesses the
understanding mentioned earlier definitely attains the abode of God;
God does not leave him astray anywhere in between.

4

“Moreover, that devotee should firmly keep his mind at the holy
feet of God. Just as an iron nail that is firmly affixed to an iron
surface can never be separated, similarly, one’s mind should be fixed
firmly at the holy feet of God. When the devotee has kept his mind at

The Vachanãmrut

558

the holy feet of God in this manner, he does not have to die to attain
the abode of God – he has attained it while still alive.”
5

Having delivered this discourse, Shriji Mahãrãj bid ‘Jai
Sachchidãnand’ to everyone and then instructed the assembly to
disperse.
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III-7 || 230 ||

Gadhadã III-8
Remaining Eternally Happy
1

On Bhãdarvã vadi 9, Samvat 1883 [25 September 1826], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a cushion with a
cylindrical pillow that had been placed on a large, decorated cot on
the veranda outside the west-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr
in Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white clothes. Garlands of
mogrã flowers adorned His neck, and tassels of mogrã flowers
decorated His pãgh. At that time, an assembly of munis as well as
devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj asked the munis, “How can a devotee
of God remain eternally happy?” The senior sãdhus replied according
to their understanding, but then Shriji Mahãrãj Himself said, “The
answer is that a devotee of God who, firstly, has firm vairãgya; who,
secondly, has extremely firm swadharma; who has gained control
over all of his indriyas by these two means; who has intense love for
God and His Bhakta; who has a close friendship with God and His
Bhakta; who never becomes indifferent towards God and His Bhakta;
and who is pleased only by the company of God and His Bhakta, but
does not like the company of a non-believer – remains eternally happy
in this realm and beyond.

3

“A person who has not controlled his indriyas by vairãgya and
swadharma remains miserable, despite staying in the company of
God and His Bhakta. Why? Because he who has not gained control
over his indriyas does not experience happiness anywhere. Even
while engaged in bhakti towards God, when the indriyas are drawn
towards the vishays, that devotee experiences extreme misery in his
heart. Thus, only one who gains control over one’s indriyas remains
eternally happy. Furthermore, only one who has gained control over
one’s indriyas should be known to have vairãgya and dharma. One
The Vachanãmrut

559

who has not controlled one’s indriyas should not be known to possess
vairãgya and dharma. Therefore, since a person who has vairãgya
and dharma has restraint over all of his indriyas, he is eternally
happy.”
4

Then Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, for a devotee of God,
what is one of the greatest obstacle in his bhakti towards God?”

5

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “For a devotee of God, the greatest
obstacles are that he does not realise his own drawbacks, his mind
becomes aloof from God and His Bhakta, and he develops indifference
towards the Bhakta of God. These are the greatest obstacles for a
devotee.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III-8 || 231 ||

Gadhadã III-9
The Gateway in the Form of Awareness
1

On Ãso sudi 11, Samvat 1883 [11 October 1826], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on the veranda outside the westfacing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed
entirely in white clothes and was adorned with garlands and strings
of flowers. Also, tassels of flowers were dangling from His pãgh. At
that time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees from various
places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said to all of the devotees, “I shall now
describe to all of you male and female devotees the elevated state and
understanding of My senior paramhansas as it truly is. After
listening to this discourse, I request all of you to narrate how you
behave and to reveal your state.”

3

Saying this, Shriji Mahãrãj began, “The senior sãdhus in My
muni-mandal behave in such a manner that the awareness within
their hearts is the gateway to the abode of God. It is at this gateway
where all of the sãdhus remain standing. Consider the following
analogy: A king’s guards, while standing at the entrance of the king’s
palace, do not allow any thieves or robbers to come near the king.
They courageously believe, ‘If anyone comes near the king to cause
problems, we will cut them to pieces, but in no way will we let them
reach the king.’ With such courage, they wait, armed with shields
and swords. Similarly, all of these sãdhus are standing at the
The Vachanãmrut

560

gateway of the abode of God in the form of awareness. Inside that
gateway of awareness – in Akshardhãm – dwells God, of whom they
do darshan. There, they do not allow wealth, women, or any other
worldly object to enter and infiltrate that form of God in their heart.
If any worldly object does forcefully attempt to enter the heart, they
destroy that object, but in no way do they allow it to enter the
location in their heart where they have secured God. In this manner,
they constantly remain alert like a brave warrior. But they do not
move from their position – regardless of whether they encounter
progress or regress, happiness or misery, praises or insults, or
countless other types of difficulties.
4

“However, someone may doubt, ‘If they do not move from their
position, then how do they perform their bodily activities such as
eating, drinking, etc.?’ I shall explain this using the following
example: Consider a woman who goes to a well to draw water. There,
she places her feet on the edge of the well. On the one hand, she
stays cautious of this, lest she falls into the well. However, her
vrutti is also fixed upon drawing water from the well. As another
example, a man who has mounted a horse is aware of his feet in the
horse’s stirrups and is also aware of the reins in his hand. While
riding, he is also mindful of the trees, ditches, and stones that come
along the path. In the same way, all of these sãdhus, while
introspecting, remain in the service of God and also perform their
bodily activities – but they are not deflected from their state.”

5

Shriji Mahãrãj thus revealed the state of the senior sãdhus and
then said, “All of you should also introspect and constantly remain in
the service of God. Moreover, you should not allow objects other than
God to become dearer to you than Him. All should be extremely
cautious of this.

6

“After all, if a king’s guard is careless while guarding the king,
thieves and robbers would reach the king, and the guard’s service
would be rendered meaningless. Similarly, if a devotee develops love
for objects other than God, then money, women and other objects also
enter his heart – wherein lies the awareness of God. Due to this, his
bhakti is rendered meaningless.

7

“Therefore, one who wishes to keep one’s bhakti free from
obstacles and to attain the holy feet of God, should remain constantly
vigilant at the gateway of the abode of God in the form of awareness,
and should not allow any objects except God to enter therein.”
The Vachanãmrut

561

8

In this way, Shriji Mahãrãj spoke words of enlightenment for all
of His devotees.
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III-9 || 232 ||

Gadhadã III-10
Vrundãvan and Kãshi
1

On Ãso vadi 12, Samvat 1883 [28 October 1826], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on the veranda outside the eastfacing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed
entirely in white clothes. At that time, an assembly of sãdhus as
well as satsangi devotees from various places had gathered before
Him.

2

In that assembly, a scholarly Brãhmin of the Mãdhvi
Sampradãy came to Shriji Mahãrãj. Shriji Mahãrãj asked him, “In
the scriptures of your sampradãy, Vrundãvan is called the abode of
God. It is also said, ‘Even at the time of final dissolution, Vrundãvan
is not destroyed.’ The followers of Shiv also claim, ‘At the time of
final dissolution, Kãshi is not destroyed.’ But I do not understand
these statements. Why? Because during final dissolution, pruthvi
and the other four bhuts are completely destroyed, so how can
Vrundãvan and Kãshi possibly remain? If they do remain, how are
they supported? Such serious doubts arise.”

3

Having said this, Shriji Mahãrãj asked for the Shrimad
Bhãgwat scripture to be brought and read aloud the narration of the
four types of dissolution i from the 11th and 12th cantos.

4

Thereafter Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Looking from the viewpoint of
the Shrimad Bhãgwat and the Gitã, during final dissolution, nothing
remains of anything that has evolved from Prakruti-Purush. So, if
in final dissolution Vrundãvan does remain intact, then please quote
a verse from the scriptures of Vyãsji or a verse from the Vedas to
prove it. Why these two? Because there is no greater ãchãrya than
Vyãsji. Others who have become ãchãryas and have established their
i

The four types of dissolution are: (1) nitya-pralay, (2) nimitta-pralay,
(3) prãkrut-pralay, and (4) ãtyãntik-pralay. See respective glossary entries for
description.

The Vachanãmrut

562

sampradãys, have accepted the scriptures written by Vyãsji as
authoritative. Therefore, the words of Vyãsji, the foremost ãchãrya,
are more authoritative than the words of all of the other ãchãryas.
So, using the words of Vyãsji and the verses of the Vedas,
substantiate the statement, ‘Vrundãvan is not destroyed in final
dissolution’ – only then will My doubt be cleared.
5

“Moreover, whoever has become an ãchãrya has established his
beliefs based on references from the words of the Padma Purãn.
Mostly, they have established these beliefs by inserting concocted
verses into the Padma Purãn. As a result, no one besides their own
followers believes them. Therefore, I will be convinced if you cite the
words of the popular Shrimad Bhãgwat Purãn. Why? Because
Vyãsji has composed the Shrimad Bhãgwat after taking the very
essence of all of the Vedas, Purãns and the Itihãs scriptures. Thus,
there is no Purãn as perfectly authoritative as the Shrimad Bhãgwat.
Also, the whole of the Mahãbhãrat is not as authoritative as the
Bhagwad Gitã. Therefore, cite the words of such powerful scriptures
to convince Me.”

6

Hearing these words of Shriji Mahãrãj, the Brãhmin said,
“Mahãrãj, the question you have raised is logical. There is no one on
this earth capable of answering your question. In my mind, I have
formed a firm belief in You; i.e., ‘You are the Ãchãrya of all ãchãryas,
the lord of all ishwars.’ Therefore, please have compassion on me and
explain to me Your principle.”

7

Shriji Mahãrãj then said, “From the Vedas, the Purãns, the
Itihãs and the Smrutis, I have formed the principle that jiva, mãyã,
ishwar, Brahma and Parabrahma are all eternal. Consider it as
follows: Mãyã represents the soil; the jivas represent the seeds in the
soil; and ishwar, the rain. By the will of God, an ishwar – in the
form of Purush – unites with mãyãi . Subsequently, just as the seeds
in the soil sprout by the association of rainwater, similarly, the jivas,
which are eternal, arise from within mãyã; but new jivas are not
created. Therefore, just as ishwar is eternal, mãyã is also eternal.
The jivas residing in mãyã are also eternal, and they are not
components of God; they are always jivas.

i Here ‘mãyã’ refers to Pradhãn-Prakruti.

The Vachanãmrut

563

8

“When a jiva seeks the refuge of God, it overcomes God’s mãyã,
becomes brahmarup like Nãrad and the Sanakãdik, attains the abode
of God, and becomes His attendant. This is My principle.”

9

Hearing these words of Shriji Mahãrãj, the Brãhmin renounced
his Vaishnav beliefs, accepted Shriji Mahãrãj’s refuge, and was
initiated into the Uddhav Sampradãy.
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III-10 || 233 ||

Gadhadã III-11
Understanding like that of Sitãji
1

On Ãshãdh sudi 3, Samvat 1884 [27 June 1827], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot on the
veranda outside the east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in
Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time, an
assembly of munis as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “I wish to ask the following
question: Is there one means to overcome both the indriyas and the
mind? Or is the means to overcome the indriyas different from the
means to overcome the mind? That is the question.”

3

The senior paramhansas answered according to their
understanding, but Shriji Mahãrãj’s question was not answered in a
satisfactory manner.

4

So Shriji Mahãrãj said Himself, “The answer is that the
indriyas are overcome by the four means of vairãgya, swadharma,
austerities and niyams. The mind is overcome by the nine types of
bhakti coupled with the knowledge of God’s greatness.”

5

Muktãnand Swãmi then asked, “How can the type of bliss that a
devotee of God enjoys in nirvikalp samãdhi be enjoyed even without
samãdhi?”

6

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “If the devotee has profound attachment
and deep love for God and His Bhakta, just like the attachment and
love that he has for his own body, then the type of bliss that prevails
in nirvikalp samãdhi will continue to remain forever, even without
that samãdhi. That is the only answer.”

The Vachanãmrut

564

7

Thereafter Shriji Mahãrãj asked the paramhansas, “What type
of understanding must a devotee have, whereby he will in no way
recede from the path of liberation regardless of the adverse
circumstances he may encounter, and whereby he develops such
staunchness that he will not be affected by any obstacles
whatsoever?”

8

The senior sãdhus answered according to their understanding,
but Shriji Mahãrãj’s question was not answered satisfactorily.

9

So Shriji Mahãrãj said, “The answer to this is as follows: If a
person is profoundly attached to God and His Bhakta, just as he is
attached to his body, then he will not be affected by any obstacles. In
fact, regardless of the extent of adverse circumstances he may
encounter, he will not turn away from God and His Bhakta.”

10

Then Shriji Mahãrãj addressed the paramhansas again. He
said, “When Jãnkiji was exiled to the forest by Rãmchandraji, she
began to lament. Lakshmanji was very sorrowful at that time as
well. But then Sitãji explained to Lakshmanji, ‘I am not crying
because of my own grief; I am crying for the grief of Rãmchandraji.
Because Raghunãthji is extremely compassionate, and since he has
exiled me to the forest out of fear of public accusation, he must be
thinking, “I have sent Sitã to the forest without any fault of her
own.”
Knowing this and being compassionate, he must be
experiencing severe grief in his mind. So please tell Rãmchandraji,
“Sitã is not distressed; she will go to Vãlmiki Rishi’s hermitage and
happily engage in your worship there. So do not feel any remorse on
account of Sitã’s distress.”’
Sitãji sent this message with
Lakshmanji, but in no way did she perceive faults in Rãmchandraji.

11

“Now, one devotee is such that he does not perceive faults in God
and His Bhakta, but his vairãgya and dharma are somewhat
moderate. On the other hand, another devotee has intense vairãgya
and dharma, but does not have an understanding like that of Sitã.
Of these two types of devotees, which type should one lovingly keep
the company of?”

12

Chaitanyãnand Swãmi replied, “One should only keep the
company – with intense love – of one who has an understanding like
Jãnkiji, even though that person’s dharma and vairãgya may be
moderate. One should not keep the company of one who, despite
having intense vairãgya and dharma, perceives faults in God and His
Bhakta.”
The Vachanãmrut

565

13

Hearing this, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “The answer is correct.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III-11 || 234 ||

Gadhadã III-12
A Magical Technique
1

On Ãshãdh vadi 8, Samvat 1884 [16 July 1827], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting in the balcony of the medi of His
residence in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed
entirely in white clothes. At that time, an assembly of munis as well
as devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Then, for the benefit of His devotees, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “One
who desires one’s own liberation should not harbour any form of
vanity – such as, ‘I have been born in an upper-class family,’ or ‘I am
wealthy,’ or ‘I am handsome,’ or ‘I am a scholar.’ One should not
keep any of these types of beliefs. In fact, even with a meek satsangi,
one should behave as a servant of servants.

3

“Furthermore, even though he may be called a satsangi, a
person who has perceived faults in God or His Bhakta should be
known to be like a rabid dog. Just as one who is touched by the
saliva of a rabid dog also becomes rabid, similarly, if one listens to
the talks of or keeps affection for one who has perceived faults in God
or His Bhakta, then both the person who keeps the affection as well
as the listener become like a non-believer. Then, just as tuberculosis
is never cured by any medicine, similarly, the demonic attitude of one
who has perceived faults in God or His Bhakta is never eradicated
from the perceiver’s heart. On the other hand, one may have killed
countless Brãhmins; or one may have killed countless children; or
one may have killed countless women; or one may have killed
countless cows; or one may even have associated many times with
the wife of one’s guru – nevertheless, at some time or other, one can
be freed from these sins. In fact, the scriptures even describe the
methods to do so. But as for perceiving faults in God or His Bhakta,
no scripture describes methods to be released from such a sin.
Indeed, if one consumes poison, or falls into the ocean, or falls from a
mountain, or is eaten by a demon, then one has to die only once. But
one who maligns God or His Bhakta has to continuously die and be
reborn for countless millions of years.
The Vachanãmrut

566

4

“Also, in the worst case, a disease leads to the death of the body;
or if an enemy is encountered, at most he destroys the body – but the
jiva is not destroyed. However, by maligning God or His Bhakta, the
jiva is also destroyed. Someone may ask though, ‘How can the jiva
be destroyed?’ Well, for example, just as a eunuch cannot be called a
man or a woman – he can only be called a eunuch, similarly, the jiva
of a person who maligns God or His Bhakta also becomes impotent;
i.e., it is never able to endeavour for its own liberation. Therefore,
his jiva should be known as having been destroyed. Knowing this,
one should never malign God or His Bhakta.

5

“In addition, one should not harbour deep affection for one’s
bodily relations, even if they happen to be satsangis. For example, if
a snake’s venom falls into some sweetened milk, then whoever drinks
it will die. In the same way, even if one’s bodily relations are
devotees of God, they are still mixed with venom in the form of
relationships. Therefore, a person who has affection for them will
definitely forfeit his liberation. Knowing this, one who wishes for
one’s own liberation should not maintain affection for one’s bodily
relations. In this way, after becoming aloof from worldly life and
harbouring love for the holy feet of God, one should continue to
engage in the worship of God.

6

“One who retains within one’s heart the discourse that I have
just delivered will never encounter obstacles on the path of liberation.
In fact, this discourse is like a magical technique.”

7

Shriji Mahãrãj thus concluded the discourse with these words.
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III-12 || 235 ||

Gadhadã III-13
Maintaining Ekãntik Dharma amidst
Adverse Circumstances
1

On Ãshãdh vadi 9, Samvat 1884 [17 July 1827], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on the veranda outside the eastfacing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed
entirely in white clothes. Garlands of mogrã flowers hung around
His neck, and tassels decorated His pãgh. At that time, some munis
were singing devotional songs to the accompaniment of a dukad and
The Vachanãmrut

567

sarodã, while other munis as well as devotees from various places
had gathered before Him in an assembly.
2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Please stop singing devotional
songs, and let us talk about God.” So saying, Shriji Mahãrãj asked a
question to the muni-mandal: “A jiva’s body is contingent upon the
karmas performed in past lives. That is why it is not always so
stable. For example, at times, a person remains healthy, and at
other times, he becomes ill; sometimes he functions independently,
whereas sometimes, he becomes dependent – whereby he may or may
not be able to stay where he chooses; at times, he may be able to stay
in the fellowship of devotees, but at some other time, he may even be
separated from them and be forced to live alone. All of this is due to
the influence of karma or kãl. In such circumstances, a person’s
resolve in observing niyams becomes unsteady.

3

“Further, if a sovereign like the British detains one somewhere;
or if one’s mind and indriyas – which are also like the British
rulers – keep one under their control, then it is uncertain whether
one will stay in the mandal of sãdhus or observe the disciplines of
Satsang. Having said this, though, the scriptures have specifically
stated: ‘If one perfectly possesses all four of the attributes of dharma,
gnãn, vairãgya and bhakti, then one can be called an ekãntik bhakta,
and such a person attains final liberation.’ However, it seems
unlikely that the physical conditions will remain stable under the
influence of kãl and karma. Therefore, how can a devotee of God
maintain his ekãntik state? That is the question.”

4

Thereupon, Gopãlãnand Swãmi, Chaitanyãnand Swãmi,
Nityãnand Swãmi, Muktãnand Swãmi, Brahmãnand Swãmi, Shuk
Muni, and other senior sãdhus answered according to whatever they
felt was correct but were unable to answer the question satisfactorily.

5

Shriji Mahãrãj then said in reply, “Please listen as I reveal to
you the way in which My faith in God remains firm.” He then
began, “Regardless of how much pain or pleasure comes My way, and
regardless of whether wealth or poverty comes My way, in those
circumstances, first I realise the immense greatness of God. It is
this realisation that allows Me, on seeing the riches and royal
opulence of the great kings of this world, to not associate even the
slightest amount of significance to them in My heart. Indeed, I
believe that for Me, there is nothing greater than God; and so My
mind is firmly attached to His holy feet. In fact, My love for God is
The Vachanãmrut

568

so firm that even kãl, karma and mãyã are incapable of destroying
that love. Even if My own mind attempts to destroy that love for
God, it cannot be destroyed. In fact, My resolve is such that
regardless of the extent of happiness or misery that may happen to
come My way, that love is not destroyed.
6

“Also, the natural inclination of My mind is such that I do not at
all prefer to live in cities, in mansions or in royal palaces. On the
contrary, I very much prefer to stay where there are forests,
mountains, rivers, trees, or in some secluded place. I feel that it
would be nice to sit alone in some secluded place and meditate upon
God. This is what I prefer at all times. In fact, before I had had the
darshan of Rãmãnand Swãmi, I had already decided with
Muktãnand Swãmi, ‘After you arrange for Me to have the darshan of
Rãmãnand Swãmi, the two of us will retire to the forest and
constantly engage ourselves in the meditation of God, and never shall
we return to stay amongst people.’ Such was the resolution of My
mind then; even now, I feel exactly the same.

7

“In addition, the profound affection that I have for God and His
devotees is so strong that even kãl, karma and mãyã are incapable of
eradicating that affection. In fact, even if My own mind attempted to
eradicate it, it would definitely not be eradicated from My heart.
Such is the intense love I have for God and His devotees.

8

“Many times I have become disheartened and felt like leaving
this Satsang, but I have remained here on seeing the fellowship of
devotees; I could in no way abandon them and leave. In fact, I would
be unable to stay where I do not find such devotees of God, even if
someone were to try by a million means to keep Me there. Regardless
of how well one may serve Me, I simply cannot get along with one
who is not a devotee of God. In this way, I have attached My mind
with profound love to God and His devotees; and other than that God,
I have no liking for anything else. If that is so, why should love for
God not remain? Indeed, when I am engaged in spiritual discourses,
devotional songs, etc., related to God, I experience such ecstasy that I
feel as if I shall become mad due to it. In fact, whatever composure
remains is solely for the benefit of the devotees; but in My mind, that
very same ecstasy always remains; although outwardly, I behave in
accordance with the etiquette of society.

9

“It is that very God who is the sole controller of this body. If He
wishes, He may oblige the body with an honourable ride on an
The Vachanãmrut

569

elephant; or if He wishes, He may have it thrown in prison; or if He
so wishes, He may even place some serious illness in the body.
Despite this, one should never pray before God in the following
manner: ‘Mahãrãj! Please relieve me of my misery.’ Why? Because
we want this body to behave in accordance with the wishes of
God; after all, God’s wish is our wish. We do not want our
preferences to differ from the preferences of God even in the slightest
way. Moreover, since we have offered our body, mind and wealth to
God, then now, only the will of God is our prãrabdha; besides that,
there is no other prãrabdha for us. Therefore, regardless of whatever
pain or pleasure we may encounter by the wish of God, we should not
become disturbed in any way; we should be pleased with whatever
pleases God.
10

“Thus, God Himself protects the dharma, gnãn, vairãgya and
bhakti of a devotee who has such intense love for God. Occasionally,
though, due to the prevalence of adverse circumstances, it may
outwardly appear that such a devotee is transgressing dharma,
gnãn, etc., but inwardly, there is no transgression at all.”

11

In this manner, by citing His own example, Shriji Mahãrãj
described the understanding of an extremely staunch devotee of God,
and how he should develop firm love for God.
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III-13 || 236 ||

Gadhadã III-14
The Kãyasth’s Indiscretion; A Donkey
1

On Ãshãdh vadi 11, Samvat 1884 [19 July 1827], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on the veranda outside the eastfacing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed
entirely in white clothes. Tassels of flowers were dangling from the
pãgh upon His head, and garlands of flowers hung around His neck.
At that time, while some munis were singing devotional songs,
paramhansas as well as devotees from various places had gathered
before Him in an assembly.

2

Then Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Please stop the singing and begin a
question-answer session.”

The Vachanãmrut

570

3

Thereupon Muktãnand Swãmi asked with folded hands,
“Mahãrãj, there is nothing more essential than God; yet why does an
individual not develop deep affection for Him? That is the question.”

4

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “He has no discretion. If he did have
discretion, he would think, ‘I have accepted the vow of
brahmacharya, yet the desire to enjoy the pleasures of women still
has not disappeared from my heart. That is very improper as I have
invariably enjoyed the pleasures of women when I have taken birth
in the 8.4 million life forms3 – and those pleasures have always been
much greater than those experienced in a human birth.’ Because
when this jiva was born as a goat, it must have single-handedly
indulged in the pleasures of a thousand she-goats. When it took birth
as a horse, or a bull, or a buffalo, or a king monkey, or indeed any
other animal, it must have encountered countless young, beautiful
females of its own species. This was not due to prãrabdha, nor was it
due to God’s grace – it was only natural. Moreover, if one does not
worship God, one will obtain countless females in whichever life form
one is born in. This would not be due to the service or puja of some
deity, or to the chanting of some mantra; because the opportunity of
enjoying women and other pleasures is but natural. In fact, several
times this jiva has become a deity, where it has enjoyed the pleasures
of Devlok; many times it has become an emperor of the world and
enjoyed countless pleasures on this earth. Despite this, though, the
jiva’s craving to enjoy women and other objects has still not
diminished. On the contrary, a person feels that the pleasures of
women and other objects are extremely rare and, realising their
immense pleasure, develops affection for them. That affection is such
that it can in no way be eradicated, however much one tries. It is
because of this sin that the jiva is unable to develop deep affection for
God.

5

“In fact, I have personally seen with My own eyes how the jiva
harbours such impure, worldly desires. When I was young, I used to
go to a mandir of Shiv in Ayodhyã and sleep there. There, a Kãyasth
came daily to offer puja to Shiv. After offering puja to Shiv, he would
pray before Shiv and ask for the following boon: ‘O Mahãrãj! O
Shivji! Never grant me a human birth again. Because in this
human birth, I have taken so many aphrodisiacs, yet I have been
unable to fully enjoy the pleasures of women to my satisfaction.
Therefore, O Shivji! Please grant me the body of a donkey for many
lives to come so that I can fully enjoy the pleasures of females
The Vachanãmrut

571

without shame or restrictions.’ He asked for this boon from Shivji
daily. So, because of this sin of harbouring worldly desires, the jiva
does not develop affection for God in any way.”
6

Muktãnand Swãmi then asked further, “Mahãrãj, one with such
extreme indiscretion does not develop affection for God. But what
about someone who believes that God is the ocean of all bliss, and
that all objects other than God are certainly full of only misery?
Despite knowing this, why does he not develop affection for God?”

7

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “In either a past life or in this present
life, that person has been influenced by extremely unfavourable
places, times, company and actions. Due to this, he has performed
very intense, sinful karmas that, in turn, have left impressions on
his mind. Therefore, despite being able to discriminate between good
and bad, he is unable to shun the bad and develop deep affection for
God. Moreover, just as the influence of unfavourable places, times,
actions and company causes the impressions of sinful karmas to
influence the mind, similarly, the influence of extremely favourable
places, favourable times, favourable actions and favourable company
causes one to perform very intense, pure karmas, the influence of
which will destroy the very intense, sinful karmas. Only then does
one develop deep affection for God. That is the answer to the
question.”

8

Thereafter Ayodhyãprasãdji asked, “Suppose, on the one hand,
there is one who is very intelligent, whose insight into the scriptures
is also exceptional. On the other hand, there is one who is not so
intelligent and who has a limited understanding of the scriptures.
Nevertheless, the one who is very intelligent falls from the Satsang
fellowship, whereas the one who is not intelligent remains firm in
Satsang. What is the reason for this?”

9

Shriji Mahãrãj answered, “There are two types of people in this
world: godly and demonic. Of these, those who are demonic will fall
from Satsang, despite being exceptionally intelligent; whereas those
who are godly will never fall from Satsang, even though they may not
be intelligent. For example, if one sows a seed of chilli or the seed of
a neem tree or the seed of a shingadiyo vachhnãg plant, and one
waters them daily with sweet water, the chillies will still turn out to
be pungent; the neem tree, bitter; and the shingadiyo vachhnãg
plant, poisonous. Why? Because the very seeds themselves are such.
On the other hand, if one sows sugarcane, the juice of the sugarcane
The Vachanãmrut

572

will still be sweet despite treating it with compost from the leaves of a
neem tree and watering it with bitter water. In the same manner,
godly people will always adhere to the path of God, and demonic
people will always turn away from the path of God.”
10

Then Shuk Muni asked, “How can one distinguish between a
godly person and a demonic person?”

11

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “In a godly person, vicious natures such
as lust, anger, avarice, etc., are due to the influence of unfavourable
circumstances. Under the influence of favourable circumstances,
however, they are destroyed within a short time. But in a demonic
person, vicious natures such as lust, anger, avarice, etc., are never
destroyed. If someone were to speak some harsh words to a demonic
person even once, he would not forget them for as long as he lives.
Then, if that demonic person were to become a satsangi, he would
initially appear to be better than all of the other devotees. But, he
would be like the following: Silt that has gathered in the region of
Bhãl – where there was previously sea – has made the soil fertile. As
long as the silt remains, sweet water can be obtained by digging
below; but if one were to dig much deeper, then extremely saline
water would emerge. In the same way, even if a demonic person has
become a devotee of God, the moment his wishes are not fulfilled and
he is even slightly disturbed, then compared to the service of the
sãdhus he had previously performed, he would malign them
thousands of times more. Even then, his mind would not be content.”

12

Muktãnand Swãmi thereupon asked, “Mahãrãj, You said that a
demonic person who becomes a devotee will remain in Satsang so
long as his wishes are fulfilled; and if they are not fulfilled, he falls
from Satsang. But what if he happens to die before falling from
Satsang? Will he remain demonic, or will he become godly?”

13

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “As long as that demonic person is good
when he encounters death, he will become godly and, offering bhakti
to God, will attain the highest state of enlightenment.”

14

Then Nrusinhãnand Swãmi asked, “Of the nine types of bhakti,
which is the best?”

15

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “Of the nine types of bhakti, whichever
type aids one in developing firm attachment to God is the best type of
bhakti for that particular person.”

The Vachanãmrut

573

16

Thereafter Gopãlãnand Swãmi asked, “During one’s childhood or
during one’s youth, what type of company should be sought?”

17

Shriji Mahãrãj answered, “Both should affectionately keep the
company of a person who is senior in age; is firm in dharma, gnãn
and vairãgya; and has deep affection for God.”

18

Then Nãjã Jogiyã asked, “Which is the best of the three: one
whose mind is attached to God out of anger, one whose mind is
attached to God out of fear or one whose mind is attached to God out
of love?”

19

Shriji Mahãrãj said, “One whose mind is attached to God out of
love is the best.”

20

Thereupon Shivãnand Swãmi asked, “How can a devotee of God
who does not possess discretion of what is good and bad as described
by Shriji Mahãrãj, and who also lacks vairãgya, cultivate such
discretion and also cultivate vairãgya towards all objects other than
God?”

21

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “If one develops firm affection for God
from the initial stages, then due to that affection, discretion and
vairãgya will automatically develop. Now, consider the following:
When one is attracted to an object, it is called affection or desire.
Then, if someone were to obstruct the gaining of any object for which
one has affection, one would become angry on that person. This
applies not only to humans; even animals express such anger. For
example, a buffalo that is attached to a female buffalo out of lust will
kill another buffalo that approaches the female; this behaviour is
widely observed in all types of animals. In the same way, one with
deep affection for God immediately becomes angry on any object that
acts as an obstruction in that affection, and he immediately shuns
that object.
Therefore, one who has deep affection for God
automatically develops vairãgya as well as discretion.”

22

Again, Shivãnand Swãmi asked, “Suppose there are two types of
people, both of whom are intelligent. Of these, one possesses faith, in
that he totally accepts whatever God says; whereas the other accepts
only those words of God that he feels are appropriate. Of the two,
who is better?”

23

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “Only the one who possesses faith is
better. Rãmchandraji has said in the Rãmãyan, ‘I protect one who
The Vachanãmrut

574

has firm faith in me – just as a mother protects her child.’
Therefore, only the one with faith is better.”
24

Then Ãtmãnand Swãmi asked, “In one’s mind, one is resolute in
behaving according to the wishes of God for the rest of one’s life.
Still, one feels, ‘What can one do for God and His Sant to earn their
trust?’”

25

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “A person earns the trust of God and
His Sant when, firstly, even if he falls severely ill and is not cared for
very well during that illness, he still does not bear an aversion
towards anyone, nor does he feel disheartened. Secondly, even if he is
harshly insulted by God and His Sant without any fault of his own,
he still does not bear an aversion towards anyone. Thirdly, if there
were to be the slightest infringement in his observance of the niyams
of this Satsang, he would feel extremely repentant and would
immediately perform atonement. Also, even if he were to entertain
an evil thought in his mind, he would feel just as repentant and
distressed as someone who had happened to physically infringe the
observance of religious vows. One with such characteristics earns
the complete trust of God and His Sant; i.e., they feel of him, ‘This
person will never fall back from Satsang.’”

26

Thereupon Bhagwadãnand Swãmi asked, “How can others
recognise a devotee who continuously understands the greatness of
God and His Bhakta in his mind?”

27

Shriji Mahãrãj answered, “One who continuously understands
the greatness of God and His Bhakta in his mind serves them
sincerely and lovingly. He physically bows and touches the feet of all
of the sãdhus. If a sãdhu were to fall ill, he would massage his head
and feet and also take care of his dietary needs. If he were to receive
some object that he liked, he would first offer it to the sãdhus before
using it for himself. One who behaves in this manner by thought,
word and deed should be known to have fully understood within one’s
heart the greatness of God and His Sant.”

28

Thereafter Shriji Mahãrãj asked the sãdhus a question: “A
person may possess intense dharma, gnãn, vairãgya and bhakti; yet
sometimes, there may be some relaxation in his observance of
dharma; there may be some attachment despite having vairãgya;
there may be some slackening in his bhakti; and attachment to his
body may still remain despite having gnãn. What can be the reason
for this?”
The Vachanãmrut

575

29

Gopãlãnand Swãmi and Brahmãnand Swãmi replied, “If there
appears to be a flaw in a person who possesses intense dharma, gnãn,
vairãgya and bhakti – a person who can be thought of as being as
powerful as God Himself – it remains purely out of compassion; it is
not a flaw as such. In fact, when such a great person behaves with
‘bãhyadrashti’i , he transforms many jivas to the ranks of Jadbharat
and Shukji. Therefore, such an extremely great person behaves in a
worldly manner purely out of compassion for the jivas.”

30

Hearing their reply, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “That is precisely the
correct answer to the question.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III-14 || 237 ||

Gadhadã III-15
Applying Bandages to Wounds
1

On Ãshãdh vadi 13, Samvat 1884 [21 July 1827], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting in the balcony of the medi of His
residence in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed
entirely in white clothes and was also wearing garlands of mogrã
flowers around His neck. At that time, an assembly of munis as well
as devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Then Shriji Mahãrãj said to Muktãnand Swãmi, “Today, I had a
long talk with the devotees who cook for Meii .”

3

Thereupon Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, what did You
talk about?”

4

Shriji Mahãrãj then said, “The talk was that when a devotee of
God sits to perform the mãnsi pujã of God or sits to meditate upon
God, he remembers the times in the past when his jiva had
succumbed to the panchvishays due to the influence of unfavourable
circumstances or the influence of lust, anger, avarice, etc. For
example, a warrior who returns injured from the battlefield rests on

i

The term ‘bãhyadrashti’ means ‘to look outwards’ and is the antonym of
‘antardrashti’.
ii Here, ‘the devotees who cook for Me’ refers to Jivubãi and Lãdubãi, the two

sisters of Dãdã Khãchar, who prepared and served meals to Shriji Mahãrãj.

The Vachanãmrut

576

a cot because of his wounds; however, until his wounds are not
dressed with bandages, the pain of the wounds does not cease, nor is
he able to sleep. Only when bandages are applied to his wounds is he
relieved of his pain, and only then is he able to sleep. In the same
way, the jiva has been ‘wounded’ by the panchvishays due to the
influence of unfavourable places, times, company and actions.
Whichever of the nine types of bhakti relieves the pain of these
‘wounds’ caused by the vishays and makes one oblivious of the
vishays themselves, should be thought of as the application of a
bandage to the ‘wounds’. Also, that particular type of bhakti should
be known to be one's inclination in worshipping God.
5

“Then, abiding by that particular inclination, one should engage
in mãnsi pujã or the mental chanting of God’s name. In fact,
whatever one may do, one should do so within one's own particular
inclination. One will benefit tremendously as a result of this.

6

"However, just as a wounded warrior experiences no peace until
his wounds are bandaged, similarly, if one fails to recognise one's own
particular inclination, one will not experience any happiness at all
during worship, and the pain due to the ‘wounds’ inflicted by the
vishays will not be relieved. Therefore, after recognising which of the
nine types of bhakti causes his mind to be fixed on God and prevents
him from indulging in any thoughts other than those of God, that
devotee should realise, ‘This is my particular inclination.’
Thereafter, he should keep that type of bhakti predominant. This
method is a universal principle.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III-15 || 238 ||

Gadhadã III-16
The Vow of Fidelity
1

On Ãshãdh vadi Amãs, Samvat 1884 [23 July 1827], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on the veranda outside the eastfacing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed
entirely in white clothes. He was wearing garlands of mogrã flowers
around His neck, and extremely beautiful tassels were dangling from
His pãgh. At that time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees
from various places had gathered before Him.

The Vachanãmrut

577

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “I ask a question to the entire
muni-mandal and to all of the householder devotees; whoever can
reply may do so. The question is as follows: It does not take very long
for a devotee of God to shun the company of a person who is full of
flaws. But how is it possible to shun the company of one with
extremely fine virtues? After all, one naturally develops affection for
a virtuous person, regardless of whether he is one’s own relative or
not. Moreover, affection that is formed due to the influence of those
virtues cannot be eradicated, however much one tries. Therefore,
how does a devotee of God prevent the development of affection for
anyone other than God, regardless of how virtuous that person may
be? That is the question.”

3

The senior sãdhus answered according to their understanding
but were unable to satisfactorily answer Shriji Mahãrãj’s question.

4

Shriji Mahãrãj then said, “Here, allow Me to answer. The
answer is as follows: A wife who observes the vow of fidelity, even if
her husband is poor, ugly, ill or old, is not even slightly impressed in
her mind on seeing other men – even if they happen to be rich,
handsome or young. If she does happen to affectionately look at or
laugh with other men, then she loses her fidelity. If some guests
were to come to the house of that faithful wife, she would offer them
food and water. If she offers food and water to some male relative of
her husband, she does so knowing him to be related to her husband,
but the affection she has for all other men does not even come close to
the affection she has for her husband. Nor does she see virtues in
other men as she sees in her own husband. Moreover, she acts
according to the wishes of her own husband. Such is the firm fidelity
that a faithful wife has towards her husband.

5

“In the same manner, a devotee should have firm fidelity to God.
Specifically, like a woman who observes the vow of fidelity, he would
never develop the same affection towards even other mukta sãdhus –
however great they may be – as he has developed towards whichever
form of God he has had the darshan of. Nor does he develop affection
for other avatãrs of his Ishtadev. He keeps affection only for the form
that he has attained, and he acts according to His wishes only. If he
does happen to respect others, it is only because of their association
with his God. One who, like a faithful wife, has such faithful bhakti
towards one’s own Ishtadev, never develops affection on seeing others,
however virtuous they may be. For example, Hanumãnji is a devotee
The Vachanãmrut

578

of Shri Raghunãthji. Following the avatãr of Rãm, there have been
many other avatãrs of God, but Hanumãnji’s bhakti has been like
that of a woman who observers the vow of fidelity, as he has
remained faithful to Rãmchandraji only. This is why Hanumãnji’s
bhakti is considered to be like that of a faithful wife. The bhakti of a
devotee of God who has such fidelity can be said to be like that of a
faithful wife. Conversely, if a person does not have such an
inclination, his bhakti can be said to be like that of a prostitute.
Therefore, one should not knowingly engage in bhakti that would
cause one to be disgraced.
Instead, a devotee of God should
thoughtfully engage in faithful bhakti – like that of a faithful wife.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III-16 || 239 ||

Gadhadã III-17
The Story of Bharatji
1

On Shrãvan sudi 6, Samvat 1884 [30 July 1827], Shriji Mahãrãj
was sitting on the veranda outside the east-facing rooms of Dãdã
Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white
clothes and was wearing garlands of flowers around His neck. At
that time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees from various
places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “There is no story in the
Shrimad Bhãgwat as incredible as the story of Bharatji. Why?
Because Bharatji was the son of Rushabhdev Bhagwãn, and for the
specific purpose of realising God, he renounced his kingdom, which
encompassed the whole world, and retired to the forest. There, while
engaged in the worship of God, he developed affection for a young
fawn. As a result, his mind’s vrutti took the form of that fawn.
Subsequently, despite his greatness, Bharatji was reborn as a deer
due to the sin of that attachment.

3

“As a matter of fact, there are countless types of sins; but for a
devotee of God, of all those sins, having affection for anything except
God is an extremely grave sin. Therefore, if a wise person thinks
over this story of Bharatji, he becomes extremely fearful in his heart
with the thought, ‘What if I develop affection for anything other than
God?’ In this manner, he becomes extremely afraid.

The Vachanãmrut

579

4

“Thereafter, when Bharatji gave up the body of the deer, he was
born in a Brãhmin family. Then, out of fear of developing affection
for anything other than God, he paid no attention at all to worldly
affairs and deliberately behaved as a madman. He thus lived in a
manner whereby he could maintain his vrutti constantly on God.”
After delivering this discourse, Shriji Mahãrãj left to attend the

5

ãrti.
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III-17 || 240 ||

Gadhadã III-18
The Degeneration of Worldly Desires
1

On Shrãvan vadi 10, Samvat 1884 [17 August 1827], Shriji
Mahãrãj was sitting on the veranda outside the east-facing rooms of
Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in
white clothes. Garlands of flowers were hung around His neck, and
tassels of flowers were dangling from His pãgh. At that time, an
assembly of munis as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj’s nephew, Raghuvirji, asked a
question: “Why does the jiva’s condition during the dream state not
remain the same as it is during the waking state?”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “The jiva behaves in the dream state
exactly as it does in the waking state. After all, the same types of
worldly desires which appear while awake spring forth in dreams as
well.”

4

Then Nirlobhãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, many times objects
that have never been seen or heard in the waking state spring forth
in dreams. What may be the reason for this?”

5

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “If objects that have never been
previously seen or heard appear in the dream state, it is due to
ingrained desires generated by karmas performed in past lives.”

6

Thereafter Akhandãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, for a person
who becomes a devotee of God, how long does the force of karmas
performed in past lives persist?”

7

Shriji Mahãrãj answered, “When that person comes into contact
with the Satpurush, the ingrained desires generated by his past
The Vachanãmrut

580

karmas gradually wear away as he consistently associates with him.
Eventually, he reaches a stage where the desires that give rise to
births and deaths no longer remain. For example, grains of rice that
are three to four years old can be eaten, but if sown, would not grow.
In the same manner, when the ingrained desires generated by
karmas performed previously become deteriorated, they do not lead to
further births and deaths.
8

“However, one may ask, ‘How does one recognise whether those
ingrained desires have degenerated, or not?’ Well, consider the
analogy of a duel between two men armed with shields and swords.
As long as both can withstand each other, the strength of both
appears to be equal. But the moment one retreats, he is said to have
been defeated. Similarly, for a devotee of God, so long as thoughts
related to God and those related to the vishays appear to be equal, he
should realise his worldly desires to be more powerful. However,
when thoughts related to God displace those related to the vishays,
then he should realise that his worldly desires have degenerated.”

9

Shriji Mahãrãj then asked the paramhansas a question: “How
can a devotee who no longer identifies himself with the body and who
has developed an aversion for the panchvishays be recognised as such
by other devotees?”

10

Muktãnand Swãmi replied, “Mahãrãj, we are incapable of
answering Your question. Please be compassionate and answer it
Yourself.”

11

So Shriji Mahãrãj then said, “Whether he be a householder or a
renunciant, a devotee of God who no longer believes himself to be the
body and whose attachment for the panchvishays has been
eradicated, may be required to behave as if he is the body depending
on God’s instructions to him; he may also have to indulge in the
panchvishays if necessary. For example, a frail bull can be made to
stand with the support of a stick and by people holding it by its horns
and tail. But, it will remain standing only as long as someone holds
it up; the moment one releases it, it will fall to the ground.
Similarly, one who is free of worldly desires engages in activities only
to the extent of the instructions given by God. Take, as another
example, a person with a bow and arrow in hand. The bow bends as
the person pulls back the string; when he releases the arrow, the bow
becomes slack again. In the same way, a person free of worldly
desires engages himself in activities only to the extent of God’s wish,
The Vachanãmrut

581

but never does he do anything which transgresses that. On the other
hand, when a person with worldly desires engages in activities, he is
unable to detach himself from those activities of his own accord; he is
unable to do so even when God instructs him to do so. Such are the
characteristics of a person free of worldly desires and a person with
worldly desires.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III-18 || 241 ||

Gadhadã III-19
Two Undesirable Traits of a Renunciant
1

On Shrãvan vadi 13, Samvat 1884 [20 August 1827], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a cushion with a
cylindrical pillow that had been placed on a large, decorated cot on
the veranda outside the west-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr
in Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white clothes. Also,
garlands of mogrã and karnikãr flowers adorned His neck. At that
time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees from various places
had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “A devotee who has renounced
worldly life may possess two undesirable traits which do not befit him
in this Satsang fellowship. The first is lust, and the second is
affection for his relatives. In my eyes, one who possesses these two
undesirable traits is like an animal. Of these two, I have an extreme
repulsion for one who has excessive affection for one’s relatives.

3

“For this reason, then, a person who has renounced worldly life
should not keep even the slightest amount of affection for his
relatives. Why? Because having affection for one’s bodily relatives is
a sin graver than the five grave sins10. Therefore, a renunciant
devotee of God should realise his own chaitanya to be distinct from
both the body and the relatives of the body. He should believe, ‘I am
the ãtmã; I have no relations at all with anyone.’ In fact, the
relatives of this body should be considered together with the relatives
of the 8.4 million types of previous life forms3. If a person does try to
understand the greatness of his relatives, knowing them to be
satsangis, then since there is already some affection due to the fact
that they are related, he develops more affection for them than he has
for God and the devotees of God. Therefore, if a person does keep
The Vachanãmrut

582

affection for one’s relatives – towards whom affection is but natural –
knowing them to be devotees of God, then his life becomes futile.
4

“Moreover, it is also natural to develop affection for those who
perform one’s menial service, though they may not be one’s relatives.
So, one who is wise should not keep affection towards a person who is
serving one, even if the person serving happens to be a devotee of
God. For example, if a snake has released venom into a mixture of
milk and sãkar, the mixture also becomes poisonous. Similarly, out
of his own self-interest, a person should not keep affection towards
one who does his menial service, even if the person serving happens
to be a devotee. Why? Because his jiva becomes attached due to
that. Then, just as he thinks about God, he also begins to think
about the one who serves his needs. For that person, this in itself is
an obstacle in his worship of God – just as the young fawn itself
became avidyã, i.e., mãyã, for Bharatji. In this manner, a devotee of
God should totally shun all who obstruct his worship of God, knowing
them to be avidyã.”

5

Shriji Mahãrãj then concluded by adding, “The paramhansas
and all of the sãnkhya-yogi devotees should daily say and listen to
this discourse which I have just delivered. Specifically, the senior
member of a mandal should daily narrate this talk, and others
should listen. If the senior person fails to do so, he should observe a
fast on that day. Those who do not come to listen to that talk of God
with shraddhã should also observe a fast. Please imbibe these words
firmly in your lives.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III-19 || 242 ||

Gadhadã III-20
‘Swabhãv’, ‘Prakruti’ and ‘Vãsanã’
1

On the night of Shrãvan vadi Amãs, Samvat 1884 [22 August
1827], Swãmi Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting in His
residence in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed
entirely in white clothes. At that time, an assembly of sãdhus as
well as devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Dinãnãth Bhatt asked a question: “Mahãrãj, kãl is
the power of God, and karma refers to the actions performed by the
jiva. But what exactly is ‘swabhãv’?”
The Vachanãmrut

583

3

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “The karmas that the jiva has
performed during past lives have fully ripened and have become
assimilated with the jiva. Just as fire ‘enters’ iron, similarly, those
karmas have ripened and have become one with the jiva. It is those
karmas that are known as ‘swabhãv’, or ‘vãsanã’, or ‘prakruti’.”

4

Muktãnand Swãmi then asked, “Mahãrãj, You call the karmas
which have become assimilated with the jiva, ‘swabhãv’ or ‘vãsanã’.
But how does one eradicate ‘vãsanã’?”

5

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “It appears that the only means to do so
is by performing the bhakti of Shri Krishna Bhagwãn, coupled with
the realisation of one’s self as the ãtmã. If one offers bhakti to Shri
Krishna Bhagwãn without ãtmã-realisation, then just as one has love
for God, one will also develop love for other material objects.
Therefore, bhakti accompanied by ãtmã-realisation is the only means
to eradicate ‘vãsanã’. However, even one who has ãtmã-realisation
may be disturbed by adverse circumstances, just like an ignorant
person. But such disturbances do not last long.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III-20 || 243 ||

Gadhadã III-21
A Golden Thread; Dharma Possesses
the Same Eminence as Bhakti
1

On Bhãdarvã sudi 9, Samvat 1884 [31 August 1827], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a cushion with a
cylindrical pillow that had been placed on a large, decorated cot on
the veranda outside the west-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr
in Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white clothes, and garlands
of chameli flowers adorned His neck. At that time, an assembly of
the entire muni-mandal as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him.

2

Then Shriji Mahãrãj requested Gopãlãnand Swãmi and Shuk
Muni to begin a question-answer session.

3

Thereupon Shuk Muni asked Gopãlãnand Swãmi, “It is through
offering bhakti to God that the jiva crosses God’s mãyã and attains
Akshardhãm. Through dharma, it attains Devlok; but once its
accumulated merits are exhausted, the jiva falls from Devlok. Now,
whenever there is a decline in dharma, God assumes an avatãr for
The Vachanãmrut

584

the purpose of re-establishing dharma, but not for the purpose of
establishing bhakti. However, it appears that what can be attained
through bhakti cannot be attained through dharma. Therefore, how
can dharma be elevated to the status of bhakti? That is the
question.”
4

Gopãlãnand Swãmi began to answer that question. In whatever
he said, though, dharma became a component of bhakti, but in no
way could he elevate the eminence of dharma to the status of bhakti.

5

On hearing this, Shriji Mahãrãj laughed a great deal, and
commented, “To answer that question is difficult indeed. Therefore,
allow Me to answer it.” He then explained, “Dharma is of two types:
One is nivrutti dharma and the other is pravrutti dharma. In turn,
these two types of dharma can either be related to God or not related
to God. Of these two, the type of dharma that is related to God is the
one that was adopted by Nãrad, the Sanakãdik, Shukji, Dhruv,
Prahlãd, Ambrish, and other devotees. It is this dharma that is
known as bhãgwat dharma or ekãntik dharma. In fact, this type of
dharma is not different from bhakti; they are both one. The type of
dharma that the avatãrs of God come to establish is this very same
dharma. On the other hand, the dharma of one’s caste and ãshram
alone is extremely inferior compared to bhãgwat dharma, because it
is through bhãgwat dharma that the jiva crosses God’s mãyã and
attains the abode of Purushottam. Therefore, the eminence of
bhãgwat dharma and bhakti is the same, and the fruits of both are
exactly the same as well. It is in this way that the greatness of
bhakti and dharma are the same. In comparison, though, the
dharma of one’s caste and ashram on its own is extremely weak, and
its fruits are also temporary.”

6

Shriji Mahãrãj then continued, “I am of the opinion that even if I
try to develop affection for anyone other than God and His ekãntik
bhaktas, I cannot do so. I also feel that My inclination is similar to
that of Jadbharat, Shukdev, Dattãtreya and Rushabhdev Bhagwãn.
As a result, I also prefer to stay only in forests, mountains and
jungles; I do not like to stay in large towns or cities. Such is My
inherent nature. Despite this, I stay in the midst of thousands of
people for the sake of God and His devotees. Nevertheless, I remain
just as detached here as I would if I were living in the forests. But I
do not stay amidst thousands of people out of any self-interest; it is
for the sake of God and His devotees that I stay in the midst of
The Vachanãmrut

585

people. In fact, no matter how much pravrutti I may have to engage
Myself in for the sake of the devotees of God, I still consider it to be
nivrutti.
7

“Moreover, I do not see the flaws of a devotee of God, however
much at fault he may be. I believe that even if there are some
intrinsic, minor flaws in a devotee of God, one should overlook them.
If those flaws are in oneself, however, then one should endeavour to
eradicate them. But if that type of flaw appears in a devotee of God,
one should not take note of that flaw. One should perceive flaws in a
devotee only if he were to lapse in his observance of some major
religious vow but not on account of some other minor flaw.

8

“One should also not be pleased by defeating a devotee of God in
arguments.
On the contrary, one should derive pleasure in
deliberately losing to him. One who does engage in an argument and
defeats a devotee of God is a sinner worse than one who has
committed the five grave sins10.

9

“In addition, I do not like even the sight of one who speaks ill of a
devotee of God before Me. In fact, I do not enjoy food or water offered
by a person who perceives flaws in a devotee of God. If he does do so,
then even if he happens to be My relative, I still develop an intense
dislike for him. Why? Because in reality, we are the ãtmã; so why
should we keep affection for our body and the relatives of the body?
We have developed affection for God and His devotees believing
ourselves to be the ãtmã, not out of the belief that we are the body.

10

“Indeed, the inner enemies of lust, anger, avarice, infatuation,
matsar, arrogance, etc., will certainly distress one who is unable to
behave as the ãtmã. Therefore, if one offers bhakti without attaining
ãtmã-realisation, one’s true nature is sure to be exposed in this
Satsang fellowship. Why? Because this Satsang is divine, and all
these satsangis are exactly like God’s attendants residing in
Shwetdwip, Vaikunth and Golok. I, Myself, swear by God and the
devotees of God that I realise these satsangis to be the same as the
attendants of God residing in the divine, all-transcending
Akshardhãm.

11

“However, one whose gnãn, vairãgya, dharma and bhakti are
not extremely firm will most certainly suffer a setback. For example,
a thread dipped in wax remains stiff in winter and monsoon, but
when summer comes, it invariably becomes slack. In the same
manner, monsoon and winter represent the period when the devotees
The Vachanãmrut

586

here are happy in every way and are also honoured in Satsang.
During that period, gnãn, vairãgya, dharma and bhakti appear to be
very intense. But with the advent of summer – the period when a
devotee is insulted in Satsang or when he becomes physically
distressed – his gnãn, vairãgya, dharma and bhakti become limp like
the thread dipped in wax. Even then, I do not forsake such a person.
But he, of his own accord, becomes obliged to withdraw from Satsang.
Thereafter, even if he is supposedly a satsangi, he does not experience
the bliss of satsang within.
12

“For this reason, then, one should practise satsang with intense
firmness after attaining ãtmã-realisation; one should not practise
satsang in such a manner that affection for one’s body and one’s
relatives persists. To continue the analogy, a thread of gold remains
the same in all six seasonsi ; it does not become limp even during the
heat of summer. Similarly, when one’s satsang is firm, regardless of
the amount of misery that may befall one and however many times
one is insulted in Satsang, one’s mind never turns away from
Satsang. Only such staunch satsangi Vaishnavs are My kith and
kin; and I wish to stay in the midst of such Vaishnavs during this
life and also in Shri Krishna Bhagwãn’s abode. Such is My
resolution, and all of you should also make the same resolution.

13

“Why do I say this? Because as you have all become My
disciples, I should tell you that which is beneficial to you. After all, a
true friend is he who tells us that which is of benefit to us, even if it
may appear to hurt. Please realise this as the characteristic of a true
friend.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III-21 || 244 ||

Gadhadã III-22
An Intimate Form of Bhakti
1

On Bhãdarvã vadi 4, Samvat 1884 [9 September 1827], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on the veranda outside the
i The six seasons are: Vasant (spring), Grishma (summer), Varshã (monsoon),

Sharad (autumn), Hemant (winter), Shishir (cool season).

The Vachanãmrut

587

west-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was
dressed entirely in white clothes. Tassels of white flowers were
hanging from His pãgh, and garlands of white flowers adorned His
neck. At that time, some paramhansas were singing a Vishnupad to
the accompaniment of a dukad and sarodã, while other paramhansas
as well as devotees from various places had gathered before Him in
an assembly. Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting in that assembly in an
introspective mood.
2

Then Shriji Mahãrãj said, “The inclination of profound, loving
bhakti in a devotee of God, as described in this devotional song, is the
inclination of Jhinãbhãi, and it was the inclination of Parvatbhãi and
Mulji as well. I was reflecting within and was thinking that there
must also be others in the Satsang fellowship with the same
inclination. One who cultivates this inclination of profound, loving
bhakti loses all attachment to the panchvishays and is able to
maintain ãtmã-realisation without even having to try.”

3

Thereupon Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Narsinh Mehtã
worshipped Shri Krishna Bhagwãn with a sense of intimacy, whereas
many devotees of God such as Nãrad and others worshipped God with
a sense of servitude. Of these two types of devotees, whose bhakti
should be regarded as being better?”

4

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “The type of bhakti offered by Narsinh
Mehtã, the gopis, Nãrad, and the Sanakãdik is not of two types; in
reality, it is of one type. After all, the body – be it male or female – is
worldly and perishable; but the jivãtmã, the worshipper, is neither
male nor female – it is characterised by pure existence and
consciousness. When it leaves its body and transmigrates to the
abode of God, it assumes a form according to the wish of God. Or,
depending upon the opportunity for service that arises there, that
devotee assumes an appropriate form and serves God accordingly.

5

“But if a devotee of God develops the same attachment to wealth,
women and other objects as he has towards God, then he cannot be
called a staunch devotee of God. Having become a devotee of God, if
one commits sins and accumulates detrimental desires in Satsang
itself while offering bhakti, then those sins become ingrained in one –
as if etched in iron. Moreover, a graver sin than associating with
others’ wives due to the influence of evil company is to look at a
devotee of God lustfully while in Satsang. Therefore, one who wishes
to develop deep attachment to God should not allow any type of sin to
The Vachanãmrut

588

remain in his mind. Why? Because female satsangi devotees are to
be viewed as one’s own mother, sister or daughter. They are the
extremely vile sinners in this world who look at women of their own
family lustfully. So, he who looks at devotees lustfully is a vile
sinner and will never be released from that sin. That is why one who
wishes to become an amorous devotee should become an amorous
devotee after shunning this kind of sin.
6

“Having said this, though, the gravest of all sins is perceiving
faults in God and His devotees, because due to that fault-finding
attitude, animosity is created towards them. Even if one has killed
millions of cows, consumed alcohol and meat, and committed
adultery with the wife of one’s guru countless times, one can still be
released from such sins at some time or other. But, a person who
maligns God and His devotees will never be released from his sin.
Then, if the maligner is a male, he will become a male demon; or if
female, she will become a female demon. Then, even after countless
lives, that person will never cease to be a demon and will never
become a devotee of God.

7

“Furthermore, one who has already maligned a devotee of God
and whose maligning attitude has become established will under no
circumstances be able to eradicate that attitude. On the other hand,
another person who is in the process of maligning, realises, ‘I have
committed a grave sin in maligning God and His devotees; therefore I
am extremely vile, and God and His devotees are extremely great.’
When one sees others’ virtues and sees faults within oneself in this
manner, then any sins one may have committed will be eradicated,
however grave they may be.

8

“Indeed, no other sin displeases and pains God more than the sin
of maligning His devotees. When Jay and Vijay insulted the
Sanakãdik in Vaikunth, God immediately rushed to the Sanakãdik
and told them, ‘Whoever maligns sãdhus like you is my enemy.
Therefore, you have done well in giving a curse to Jay and Vijay. In
fact, if my own hand were to harm pious Brãhmins like you, then
even I would cut off my hand; so what can I say of others?’ This is
what Vaikunthnãth Bhagwãn said to the Sanakãdik. Consequently,
Jay and Vijay became demons due to the sin of maligning the pious
devotees of God. Others who have also maligned devotees of God have
all fallen from their eminent position – a fact that is well noted in the
scriptures. Therefore, one who desires one’s own good should not
The Vachanãmrut

589

malign the devotees of God. If one does happen to knowingly or
unknowingly malign someone, then one should bow to that person’s
feet, pray to him, and act in a manner that pleases him.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III-22 || 245 ||

Gadhadã III-23
Mãnsi Pujã
1

On the night of Ãso sudi Punam, Samvat 1885 [22 October
1828], Swãmi Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large,
decorated cot that had been placed in the yard of His residence in
Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in
white clothes. At that time, an assembly of paramhansas as well as
devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj, out of compassion, addressed all of
the devotees and said, “One who is a devotee of God daily performs
the mãnsi pujã of God. The details of performing that mãnsi pujã are
as follows: One should perform that mãnsi pujã in different ways,
depending on the three seasons; namely summer, winter and
monsoon.

3

“During the four months of summer, one should perform puja by
first bathing God with cool, fragrant, pure water. One should then
offer Him a beautiful, washed, white khes to wear, which is thin and
fine. After seating God on a beautiful seat, His whole body should be
smeared with fragrant sandalwood from the Malay mountains, which
has been collected in a bowl after forming it into a paste. Firstly, the
sandalwood paste should be smeared on His forehead and closely
observed; then His hands should be smeared and closely observed;
then the paste should be smeared on His chest, stomach, thighs,
calves, and other parts of His body. Those parts should also be
observed. Then, beautiful kumkum should be applied on His holy feet
as well as on the soles of His feet, and they too should then be
observed. Thereafter, garlands of fragrant flowers such as mogrã,
chameli, champã, roses, etc., as well as various ornaments such as a
cap, armlets, wristlets, etc., made of flowers should be offered. A fine
cloth that is not too heavy and is as white as a mogrã flower should
be tied around His head; and a beautiful, white cloth which is fine
and light, should be wrapped around His body. Then one should
embrace God – once, or twice, or according to the degree of one’s love.
The Vachanãmrut

590

Thereafter, one should touch God’s holy feet to one’s own chest and
head. During that embrace, the sandalwood paste on God’s body as
well as parts from the garlands of flowers may stick to one’s own
body; and kumkum may also stick as a result of touching God’s holy
feet to one’s own chest and head. All this should be visualised; i.e.,
one should feel, ‘Sandalwood paste, kumkum and garlands
consecrated by God have touched my body!’
4

“During the four months of winter, one should perform puja by
first bathing God with warm water and then offering Him a white
khes to wear. One should then seat God on a decorated cot with a
velvet mattress that has been covered with a white bedsheet. One
should offer a survãl, offer a dagli, tie a rich orange reto of golden
threads around His head, tie a rich reto around His waist, and place
a rich reto over His shoulders. Then one should place various
ornaments made of diamonds, pearls, gold and rubies on various
parts of His body and adorn Him with a pearl necklace as well. After
offering these clothes and ornaments, the various parts of God’s body
should be closely observed. A kumkum chãndlo should also be
applied to God’s forehead.

5

“During the four months of monsoon, one should perform puja
imagining that God has returned from some village, His white
clothes having become completely drenched; or that He had gone to
bathe with the paramhansas in a river and has returned from there
drenched. After removing His wet clothes, He should be offered deep
orange garments to wear; and His forehead should be smeared with
yellow sandalwood paste mixed with saffron.

6

“During summer, one should visualise God to be sitting either in
an open place or in a flower garden. During winter and monsoon, one
should visualise God to be seated in a fine medi, or inside a house. In
particular, when offering God something to eat, only those foods –
chewable, drinkable, lickable or suckable – which one likes to eat
should be visualised for offering to God. Even if God does not like
such foods, when offering items to Him, one should still visualise only
those items that are relished by oneself. Also, incense, oil lamps, ãrti
and other articles should be offered to God as appropriate.

7

“In this manner, a devotee who offers puja in different ways
according to the three different seasons increases his love for God,
and his jiva benefits tremendously. Therefore, whoever has heard
this discourse should imbibe it and daily perform the mãnsi pujã of
The Vachanãmrut

591

God in the manner described.
talked about this before.”
8

As a matter of fact, I have never

Shriji Mahãrãj then spoke on another topic. He said, “When
God and His Bhakta are pleased on a devotee, he should feel, ‘It is my
great fortune that God and His Bhakta are pleased with me.’ Also,
when, for the purpose of teaching a lesson, they reprimand him, he
should feel, ‘It is my great fortune that they reprimand me; after all,
it will help in removing my flaws.’ In this way, one should be pleased
even if reprimanded; one should not feel any grief in one’s mind, nor
get upset, nor even regard oneself as being very sinful. Indeed, one
should always remain pleased. This attitude is also worthy of being
imbibed.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III-23 || 246 ||

Gadhadã III-24
Sixteen Spiritual Endeavours; Vairãgya Due To Gnãn
1

On Ãso vadi 12, Samvat 1885 [4 November 1828], Shriji
Mahãrãj was sitting in the mandir of Shri Gopinãthji in Dãdã
Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white
clothes. At that time, an assembly of sãdhus as well as devotees
from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Muktãnand Swãmi asked Shriji Mahãrãj, “The
devotees of God remain in God’s service in Akshardhãm. What are
the spiritual endeavours needed to earn such service?”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “Shraddhã, swadharma, vairãgya, total
control over the indriyas, non-violence, brahmacharya, keeping the
company of sãdhus, ãtmã-realisation, unflinching bhakti to God
coupled with the knowledge of His greatness, contentment, sincerity,
compassion, austerities, treating those devotees of God who are senior
to one in terms of virtues as gurus and also maintaining deep respect
for them, maintaining a feeling of friendship towards those devotees
of God who are one’s equals, and treating those devotees of God who
are junior to one as disciples as well as acting for their benefit –
through these 16 spiritual endeavours, an ekãntik bhakta of God
easily earns God’s service in Akshardhãm.”

4

Shuk Muni then asked, “All of our sãdhus observe religious
vows. But what characteristic in a sãdhu would enable us to be sure
The Vachanãmrut

592

that that sãdhu would never deviate from his dharma even in times
of adversity?”
5

Shriji Mahãrãj answered, “He whose attention is constantly
focused on all of those mandates, major or minor, given by God, and
who finds it extremely difficult to infringe any mandate; and who
acts neither excessively nor in a lax manner regarding those
mandates, should be known as one who would not fall from his
dharma despite adverse circumstances.”

6

Shriji Mahãrãj then spoke out of compassion: “For a person to
eradicate one’s innate nature is indeed difficult. In spite of this, if
one has realised Satsang to be the fulfiller of one’s self-interest, then
it is not difficult to do so. For example, the members of Dãdã
Khãchar’s family have an interest in keeping Me here, so they do not
retain any nature which I do not like. In this way, one’s innate
nature can be eradicated due to self-interest. It can also be
eradicated out of fear, albeit not totally. Why? Because one may fear
a person in the person’s presence, but when that person is not
present, one may no longer be fearful – just as a thief abandons his
corrupt nature out of fear of the king.

7

“Furthermore, despite the fact that I have repeatedly fired harsh
words and upset one who possesses some swabhãv or another, if one
is not disheartened in any way at all, then I have such love for that
person that that love remains effortlessly as it is, in the waking and
dream states. Regardless of whatever happens, that love does not
diminish.

8

“Moreover, of the various virtues possessed by devotees, I shall
now narrate one admirable virtue in each. Dãdã Khãchar, the virtue
of faith; Rãjbãi, the virtue of renunciation; Jivubãi, the virtue of
shraddhã; Lãdubãi, the virtue of desiring to please Me; Nityãnand
Swãmi, the virtue of desiring to please Me; Brahmãnand Swãmi, the
virtue of insisting that there should be no lapse at all in observing
the disciplines of Satsang; Muktãnand Swãmi, the virtues of desiring
to please Me and having faith in Me; Somlã Khãchar, the virtue of
always behaving consistently; Chaitanyãnand Swãmi, the virtue of
wishing to behave in such a manner that pleases Mahãrãj in some
way; Swayamprakãshãnand Swãmi, the virtues of faith in God and
realising His greatness; Jhinãbhãi Thãkor, the virtue of having
awareness, lest he becomes attached to any object other than God;
and Motã Ãtmãnand Swãmi, the virtue of ensuring that none of My
The Vachanãmrut

593

commands are disobeyed.” In this manner, Shriji Mahãrãj narrated
the virtues of many senior paramhansas and other devotees.
9

He then continued, “The three senior ladies of this place and
Gopãlãnand Swãmi, Brahmãnand Swãmi, Muktãnand Swãmi,
Nityãnand Swãmi, Shuk Muni, Somlã Khãchar and Dãdã Khãchar –
all of you presently behave very well. However, if the four factors of
place, time, company and action were to become unfavourable, then
there is no doubt at all that your enthusiasm would not remain as it
is now. However, if a person who has a greater degree of gnãn were
to be caught in the vishays by chance, he would break free from that
attachment. What is that gnãn? It is the understanding, ‘I, the jiva,
am like this; the body is like this; the relations of the body are like
this; the nature of Prakruti, Purush, virãt, sutrãtmã and avyãkrut
is like this; God is like this; and the abode of God is like this,’ and so
on. If one has a firm conviction of this gnãn in one’s heart, then the
vairãgya that results is true vairãgya. Apart from that, any other
form of vairãgya only superficially appears to be vairãgya; in fact,
there is no strength in it. For example, the flame of an oil lamp is
extinguished by the wind, whereas the vadvãnal fire and the fire of
lightning in the clouds is not extinguished by water; in fact, despite
remaining in water itself, it continues to burn. In the same manner,
vairãgya without gnãn does not last when it encounters the vishays.
On the other hand, vairãgya produced from gnãn does not diminish
despite encountering the vishays; it continues to burn like the
vadvãnal fire.

10

“It is precisely for the purpose of somehow instilling this gnãn in
your minds that I continuously deliver discourses. Because if a
discourse eventually does truly inspire you, then this gnãn will
become instilled in you. Conversely, if a person does not understand
this and instead harbours a sense of I-ness and my-ness by believing,
‘This is my caste, this is my mother, this is my father, these are my
relatives,’ then he should be known to be an extremely ignorant
person possessing a worldly perspective.”

11

Having said this, Shriji Mahãrãj again spoke out of compassion:
“What is the reason behind a spiritual aspirant attaining noble
virtues? Well, one develops an aversion for the world in proportion to
the attachment one has for listening to the talks and discourses
related to God; moreover, vicious natures such as lust, anger,
avarice, etc., are also destroyed to that extent. Conversely, if
The Vachanãmrut

594

someone is lazy in listening to those talks and discourses, then one
should infer that he will not imbibe noble virtues. In fact, out of the
nine types of bhakti mentioned in the scriptures, the bhakti of
listening to spiritual discourses is considered to be the best.
Therefore, one who possesses that form of bhakti will attain all of the
various forms of bhakti up to and including profound, loving bhakti.”
Shriji Mahãrãj delivered the discourse in this manner.
12

At mid-afternoon on that same day, when all of the
paramhansas were seated for their meals in a line on the veranda
outside the north-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr, Shriji
Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot that had been placed
under the neem tree.

13

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said to the paramhansas, “One should
not understand the greatness of female devotees in excess. Why?
Because under the pretext of realising their greatness, one may
constantly think of them, leading to them appearing in one’s dreams.
So, if one does understand their greatness, one should understand it
collectively, by thinking, ‘All of them are devotees of God.’ But, one
should not attempt to understand a particular one as being greater
and another one being lesser.
However, if one attempts to
understand their greatness to a greater or lesser degree than this,
then there is a great danger in that. Similarly, female devotees
should also understand the greatness of male devotees collectively. If
they do not realise this, then it is also a great danger for those
females.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III-24 || 247 ||

Gadhadã III-25
Pleasing Shriji Mahãrãj; A True Devotee of God
1

On Kãrtik sudi 10, Samvat 1885 [16 November 1828], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot on
the veranda outside the west-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr
in Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time,
an assembly of paramhansas as well as devotees from various places
had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj spoke out of compassion: “‘Bhakti,
upãsanã, service, shraddhã, firmness in observing dharma, and
The Vachanãmrut

595

other spiritual endeavours related to God should all be performed
without harbouring desires for any other fruits.’ This fact is
mentioned in the sacred scriptures, and it is true; but one should
certainly harbour the following desire: ‘May God become pleased with
me through these endeavours.’ That desire should be kept. If, on the
other hand, a person does not keep such a desire and acts without
any specific objective, then he should be known to possess tamogun.
Therefore, one should develop the virtues of bhakti, upãsanã, etc.
with the desire for fruits in the form of the pleasure of God. If a
person nourishes any desire other than that, he will attain only fruits
such as the four types of liberation i .
3

“Furthermore, it is not the case that God’s pleasure is bestowed
only on those who offer bhakti with various articles and not upon the
poor. Someone may be poor, but if he offers water, leaves, fruits and
flowers to God with shraddhã, that is enough to please Him. Why?
Because God is extremely great. Just as a king rewards someone who
composes even a single verse in his praise with a village, similarly,
God also becomes gratified instantly.”

4

Continuing, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Who can be called a true
devotee of God? If some prolonged illness were to overtake a person’s
body, or if he receives neither food to eat nor any clothes to wear; in
fact, regardless of the extent of pain or pleasure that come his way, if
he still does not regress even slightly from the worship and bhakti of
God, niyams, dharma or shraddhã, but on the contrary, progresses
with time – then he is called a true devotee.”

5

Then Rãjbãi had a question asked to Shriji Mahãrãj, “Mahãrãj,
which virtues please You and which flaws displease You?”

6

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “The following are the flaws of speech:
Specifically, if someone wishes to behave in some special way, then he
should notify Me only once by saying: ‘Mahãrãj, if You agree, then I
shall behave like this.’ But he should not repeatedly ask, ‘Mahãrãj,
why are You not telling me whether I should behave like this or
behave like that?’ That I do not like. Also, I do not like a person
who, despite knowing Me as his Ishtadev, repeatedly cross-questions
i The four types of liberation as described in Gadh I-43.2 are: (1) to reside in the

realm of God; (2) to stay near God; (3) to assume a form similar to that of God;
and (4) to attain divine powers similar to God’s powers.

The Vachanãmrut

596

My words. Nor do I like a person who, without being asked,
interrupts Me while I am speaking to someone. Regarding the
performance of pious actions such as meditating on God, observance
of dharma, offering bhakti, etc., I do not like a person who throws the
burden of such actions on God by thinking, ‘Only if God wishes are
these possible.’ Nor do I like a person who thinks, ‘I shall do this;
and I shall do that,’ and thereby relies solely on his own strength and
not on the strength of God. Also, I extremely dislike a person who
speaks inconsistently and coarsely. Nor do I like a person who feels a
sense of shame or laziness when it comes to talking of God, engaging
in spiritual discourses or singing devotional songs, and yet feels no
shame or laziness in performing worldly activities. Also, I do not like
a person who boasts of his virtue of renunciation or bhakti, or of
anything else. I do not like a person who sits behind everyone else
during an assembly instead of sitting as befits his own status.
Moreover, when seniors are seated in an assembly, I do not like a
person who forcibly pushes them aside to take his own place at the
front of the assembly.
7

“In addition, I am pleased with female devotees who behave
chastely by covering their own bodies and who, instead of keeping a
wandering gaze, keep their gaze cast downwards when they walk.
Many times, instead of doing My darshan with a fixed gaze, someone
may forsake that darshan and look repeatedly in the direction of an
approaching man or woman, or a dog walking by, or cattle walking
by or in the direction of some noise. On such a person, I feel so much
disgust that I feel, ‘What can I do? If I had not become a sãdhu, I
would beat him in some way!’ But that is not possible since beating
someone is extremely inappropriate for a sãdhu. I also do not like a
person who conceals the truth, i.e., who does not disclose to an
appropriate person the disturbing thoughts that arise in his mind.
These three things are extremely detrimental: egotism, anger, and
being suppressed by others, i.e., not revealing what is in one’s mind
due to the suppression of others.
Also, if devotees become
disrespectful because they view each other as equals and do not
maintain respect for one another, that is extremely inappropriate as
well.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III-25 || 248 ||

The Vachanãmrut

597

Gadhadã III-26
The Sant Who Suppresses His Mind and Indriyas
1

On Kãrtik sudi 11, Samvat 1885 [17 November 1828], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting in the mandir of Shri
Gopinãthji in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed
entirely in white clothes. At that time, an assembly of paramhansas
as well as devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “What are the characteristics of
a Sant who is worthy of being worshipped on par with God? Well,
such a Sant suppresses the actions of mãyã’s gunas – the indriyas,
the antahkaran, etc.; but he himself does not get suppressed by their
actions. In addition to this, he only performs activities related to
God; he is staunch in his observance of the five religious vows4; and
believing himself to be brahmarup, he worships Purushottam
Bhagwãn. Such a Sant should not be thought of as a human being,
nor should he be thought of as a deity, because such behaviour is not
possible for either humans or deities. Indeed, even though that Sant
appears to be human, he is still worthy of being worshipped on par
with God. Therefore, whoever desires to attain liberation should
serve such a Sant. Also, females should serve females possessing
such virtuous qualities.”

3

Then Ãtmãnand Swãmi asked Shriji Mahãrãj, “Regardless of
how ordinary one may be, as long as one stays within the limits of
the vows of this Satsang, one will not become bound by the
panchvishays. Please narrate the characteristics of a person who
cannot become bound by the panchvishays, even though he may
happen to leave the Satsang fellowship due to unfavourable
circumstances.”

4

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “If a person has dharma predominant
in his mind; and if he has the qualities of an ãstik in that he firmly
believes, ‘One who performs pious or impious karmas in this realm
will undoubtedly receive the respective fruits of those karmas in the
realm beyond’; and if he, having such firm beliefs, is concerned about
his own reputation by thinking, ‘If I do something immoral, what
will people think of me?’, then he will not become bound by any
object – women or others – wherever he goes.
For example,
Mayãrãm Bhatt, Mulji Brahmachãri, Nishkulãnand Swãmi and

The Vachanãmrut

598

those of that calibre will never falter even if they encounter women,
wealth, etc.
5

“However, someone who is like this may, firstly, have the
attributes of false ãtmã-realisation in thinking, ‘I am the ãtmã; I am
Brahma; so I am not affected by good or bad actions. I am absolutely
detached from everything.’ Secondly, he may falsely understand the
greatness of God; i.e., he may talk a great deal about that greatness,
by saying, ‘The greatness of God is so profound! So what harm is
there in transgressing dharma?’ In such a person, these two types of
flaws could become major obstacles in the observance of dharma.
Therefore, it is better if he has genuine ãtmã-realisation, he
thoroughly understands the greatness of God, and he firmly
observes – with understanding – the various types of dharma, such
as the vows of non-lust, non-avarice, non-taste, non-attachment, nonegotism, etc., in order to please God. Such a person believes, ‘If I
observe dharma, God will be extremely pleased with me, and if I
deviate from dharma in any way, then God will be extremely
displeased with me.’ If he has this firm conviction within, then that
devotee will never falter from dharma in any way. On the other
hand, if a person does not have this kind of understanding, then
regardless of how much gnãn he may have, or how much bhakti he
may offer, he may still deviate from dharma or become bound by
worldly objects. This is a fundamental truth.”

6

Shriji Mahãrãj again addressed the assembly out of compassion:
“I do not like vanity. That vanity may be of one’s virtues of bhakti,
renunciation, or vairãgya; of one’s attainment of the attributes of
Brahma; of one's understanding; or of one’s observance of the five
religious vows4. I do not like these or any other forms of vanity.
Also, I do not like hypocrisy. What is hypocrisy? Well, although one
may not have much faith, bhakti or dharma, to outwardly pretend to
possess them to a great extent in order to look pious in front of others
is hypocrisy. That, I do not like. Nor do I like any person who, while
worshipping God, eliminates the distinction between himself and
God. I also do not like a person who behaves liberally; i.e., after
taking a vow, he adheres to it occasionally and relaxes from it
occasionally. In addition, I do not like a person who, having
extensively understood the profound glory of God, considers himself to
be extremely insignificant and does not believe his true form to be the
ãtmã, which is distinct from the body.
The Vachanãmrut

599

7

“Now I shall describe the type of person I do like. Such a person
thoroughly understands the greatness of God. He understands his
ãtmã – which is vyatirek from the body – to be brahmarup. He
firmly observes dharma and also staunchly engages in the bhakti of
God. Despite having such virtues, if there is some devotee in the
Satsang fellowship who does not understand anything yet has faith in
God, then the former would consider the latter to be great and
himself to be insignificant in comparison to that devotee. When
speaking, such a person never reveals even the slightest pride of his
wisdom. I am extremely pleased with a person who behaves in this
manner.”

8

Having delivered this discourse, Shriji Mahãrãj returned to His
residence.
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III-26 || 249 ||

Gadhadã III-27
Not Keeping Any Obstinacy
1

On Kãrtik sudi Punam, Samvat 1885 [21 November 1828],
Swãmi Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting in the mandir of Shri
Gopinãthji in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed
entirely in white clothes. At that time, an assembly of paramhansas
as well as devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “The pleasures associated with
sights, sounds, smells, tastes and touch are all found to co-exist in
one place – the blissful and divine form of Purushottam Bhagwãn.
When we have the darshan of that form of God, we can enjoy the
bliss of that beauty, as well as the bliss of the other four types of
vishays, i.e., sounds, touch, etc.
That gratification occurs
simultaneously. With worldly vishays, however, when one indulges
in one vishay, one receives the gratification of only that vishay, but
not of the others. Thus the pleasures of worldly vishays are found
separately. Moreover, those pleasures are futile, perishable and
ultimately the cause of extreme misery. But in God, one enjoys the
bliss of all of the vishays simultaneously. That bliss is extremely
divine; it is eternal and imperishable. Therefore, a spiritual aspirant
should develop vairãgya towards the worldly vishays and become
totally attached to the divine and blissful form of God.”
The Vachanãmrut

600

3

Shriji Mahãrãj then continued, “If a devotee has an intense
yearning to engage in the bhakti of God and to associate with the
Sant, then regardless of any swabhãv that he may possess, he
eradicates it and behaves according to the Sant’s will and command.
Even if that swabhãv is such that it has become bound to the
chaitanya, one who has an intense desire to do satsang will eradicate
it.” With that, He narrated His own story: “Initially, My nature was
like that of a renunciant, but because I had an intense yearning for
the darshan of Shri Rãmãnand Swãmi, I lived according to
Muktãnand Swãmi’s instructions, not according to My personal
preferences.”

4

Thereafter Shriji Mahãrãj said, “The details of the kind of
obstinacy a devotee should and should not keep are as follows: One
type of obstinacy is observing the vows of non-lust and other such
vows; the other type of obstinacy is behaving with the feeling that one
will be able to sleep only if one’s place is here and not if it is
elsewhere. The latter and other innumerable forms of obstinacy that
are the result of trivial swabhãvs should not be considered the same
as the former type of obstinacy. The obstinacy of observing religious
vows is as essential as one’s own life; it is extremely beneficial. That
type of obstinacy should be kept with an understanding of its
importance. But if the latter type of obstinacy, which is due to
swabhãvs, is formed, it should be thought of as worthless; and if the
Sant asks one to abandon it, it should be abandoned. The former
type of obstinacy, however, should not be abandoned.

5

“To consider these two forms of obstinacy as equivalent is
foolishness. For example, if a child has almonds in his fist, and if
someone attempts to make him give them up, he will not.
Furthermore, if he has a fist full of rupees or a fist full of gold coins,
and if someone attempts to make him give them up, he will not give
them up. Thus, it can be said that the child considers the almonds,
the rupees and the gold coins to be of equal value. Therefore, the
child can be considered to be ignorant.

6

“If someone has almonds in his hand, and a thief comes and
threatens the person, saying, ‘Put them down, or I will cut off your
head with this sword,’ then one who is wise will give them away, but
one who is foolish will not. Similarly, between the two types of
obstinacy, one should realise which is significant and which is
insignificant. If someone does not understand this and considers both
The Vachanãmrut

601

to be equivalent, then he should be known to have a swabhãv of
obstinacy and to be arrogant. If such a person does observe religious
vows because of that obstinacy, and if he remains in the Satsang
fellowship in this manner till the end, then it is all well and good; but
one cannot have complete faith in him. Why? Because if he is
offended by some remarks, or if his self-importance is not
maintained, then he will not remain as he is. On the other hand, one
who offers bhakti to God and observes religious vows with obstinacy
is called a rãjarshi. Even greater, one who offers bhakti to God while
observing religious vows with the intention of pleasing God is called a
brahmarshi and a sãdhu. There is a similar difference in the fruits
of the two as well.”
7

Continuing, Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “Egotism, jealousy and
anger – these three vicious natures are much more detrimental than
even lust. Why? Because the Sant may have compassion on a
lustful person, but he will not have compassion on an egotistical
person. In addition, jealousy and anger are evolved from egotism.
Therefore, egotism is a major vice. Furthermore, one does not fall
from Satsang due to lust as one does due to egotism. For example,
there are many householder devotees in our Satsang – and they
continue to remain in Satsang. So, I always have an intense
aversion for these three: egotism, jealousy and anger. You will find
this verified in My spoken words which have been written down.
Also, if you reflect upon them, then you will realise this to be true as
well. Therefore, one should eradicate egotism by realising the
greatness of God.”

8

Again, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “What is the conviction of God?
Well, consider how it is in worldly life. Since childhood, one has the
conviction of one’s parents, caste, sub-caste, ãshram, gender, as well
as the conviction that this is an animal, this is a man, this is water,
this is fire, this is the earth, this is the wind, this is the sky, and so
on. All this is due to the scriptures. Even if one has not heard the
scriptures, one has been convinced by principles prevalent in
society – which themselves were derived from the scriptures.
Similarly, the attributes of the Sant – being free of lust, avarice,
egotism, taste, attachment, etc. – are also described in the scriptures.
The Sant who possesses these attributes has a direct relationship
with God. Therefore, one should develop the conviction of God based
on his words. In fact, to have firm faith in the words of the Sant is
itself the conviction of God.”
The Vachanãmrut

602

9

Thereafter Nãth Bhakta of Vadodarã asked Shriji Mahãrãj a
question: “Do the relatives of a devotee of God who has firm faith in
God attain liberation due to their relationship with that devotee?”

10

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “If the relatives or ancestors of the
devotee of God have affection for him, then yes, they will attain
liberation; otherwise, they will not. In fact, even if one who is not
related to that devotee has affection for him, then he will also benefit.
Why? Because at the time of one’s death, one may remember that
devotee whose vrutti is constantly fixed on God.
Thus, by
remembering that devotee, one attains liberation.”

11

Shriji Mahãrãj then said, “I talk about the nature of the ãtmã
and about the nature of God; yet, by merely talking about them one
does not experience their bliss as it really is. Their true bliss can
only be experienced in samãdhi, or after one leaves the body; but it
cannot be experienced by merely talking about it. For example, the
pleasure of looking at an attractive object can only be enjoyed by the
eyes. If someone were to praise that pleasure with his mouth by
saying, ‘I saw a very beautiful object,’ then the pleasure experienced
by the mouth is not the same as that experienced by the eyes.
Similarly, one may attempt to praise with words the pleasure of
sounds heard by the ears, fragrances smelt by the nose, sensations
felt by the skin, and flavours tasted by the tongue, by saying, ‘It was
an extremely pleasant smell; it had a delicious taste; it felt very good;
it sounded nice’ – but one does not experience pleasure through words
as one experiences the respective pleasures through the respective
indriyas. Similarly, the bliss and the happiness of God which one
experiences, as well as the bliss and the happiness of the ãtmã which
one experiences through samãdhi or after leaving the body cannot be
experienced by merely talking about them. However, if one does
shravan, manan and nididhyãs on these two topics, then one attains
realisation. Then, after attaining realisation, one enjoys the same
experience and bliss as one does from these two in samãdhi.
Therefore, after listening to talks concerning these two, one should do
manan and nididhyãs on those talks.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III-27 || 250 ||

The Vachanãmrut

603

Gadhadã III-28
Falling from the Path of God
1

On Kãrtik vadi 1, Samvat 1885 [22 November 1828], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting in the mandir of Shri
Gopinãthji in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed
entirely in white clothes. At that time, an assembly of paramhansas
as well as devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “There are two ways in which a
person falls from the bhakti of God: One is by listening to shushkaVedãnta scriptures, whereby he may consider the form of Shri
Krishna Bhagwãn and other forms of God to be false – just as he
considers all other forms to be false. Such a shushka-Vedãnti should
be considered to be extremely ignorant. The other way of falling is by
believing, ‘If I worship God, then I will enjoy women, food, drink and
other pleasures of the panchvishays in Golok and Vaikunth.’ Then,
due to the desires of those pleasures, he forgets even God. The fool,
with his distorted mind, believes, ‘If that enjoyment was not true,
then God would not associate with women like Rãdhã, Lakshmi, etc.,
in that abode. So that pleasure is also true.’ But he does not realise
God to be absolutely self-fulfilled and content within His own ãtmã.
In actual fact, such activities of God are for the purpose of giving
bliss to His own devotees. Therefore, one should engage in bhakti
together with gnãn and vairãgya.

3

“One who has understood the greatness of God realises that only
God is all-blissful, whereas the pleasures derived from the
panchvishays have only a slight fraction of the bliss of God; thus he
would never become attached to any object. The Moksh-dharma also
mentions: ‘Compared to the bliss of the abode of God, the pleasures of
the other realms are like narak.’ This is the understanding that a
devotee of God should have. If he does not have this understanding,
he will fall away from God in the two aforementioned ways.”

4

Thereupon Surã Khãchar asked Shriji Mahãrãj, “Even after
resolutely forming the conviction of God and the Sant as they truly
are, what is the reason for someone suffering a setback?”

5

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “There was some deficiency in that
person’s conviction from the moment that he first established it.
What was that deficiency? Well, if someone wishes to indulge in
savoury food due to a desire for tasting delicious food, and if God or
The Vachanãmrut

604

the Sant denounce it, then he will suffer a setback. Or, if disturbing
thoughts of lust still remain, and they speak against it; or if avarice
remains, and if they have him renounce his avarice by telling him,
‘Give away your wealth, property, land and farm to someone,’ then he
will be unable to follow this command. Consequently, he suffers a
setback. Or if a person has egotism and the Sant denounces it and
insults him, then he suffers a setback due to that as well. Therefore,
a person suffers a setback due to the faults that still remain in him,
even though he has the conviction of God. But if one eradicates one’s
faults at the outset – when one establishes one’s conviction – then one
will not suffer a setback. At present, if those who possess these faults
thoughtfully introspect, they will be able to realise, ‘I am weak in
this aspect. So if I am asked to follow such a command, I will fall
back from Satsang.’ In this way, they can understand themselves
comprehensively.”
6

Thereafter, Shriji Mahãrãj asked Brahmãnand Swãmi, Shuk
Muni and Surã Khãchar a question: “What flaw do you possess which
would have you suffer a setback?”

7

The three of them answered, “Mahãrãj, we have the flaw of
egotism. As a result, if a sãdhu of equal status insults us, we become
somewhat disturbed.”

8

Hearing this, Shriji Mahãrãj commented, “Then I ask that if one
has realised God with the knowledge of His greatness as mentioned
in ‘lÈÃ¬ÿ ∞fl Ã Ÿ ÿÿÈ⁄UãÃ◊ŸãÃÃÿÊ …H’i then how can one keep egotism,
jealousy or anger towards a sãdhu of such a God? If one still does,
then there is a flaw in one’s understanding. For example, if one
understands the authority of the Governor sahib – that he is the king
of the whole world and that he is extremely powerful – then even if
i Dyupataya eva te na yayur-antam anantatayã…||

Even the masters of the higher realms [i.e. deities such as Brahmã] cannot
fathom your greatness – because it is endless. [In fact,] neither can you yourself
[fathom your own greatness]. Indeed, in your each and every hair countless
brahmãnds accompanied with their barriers fly simultaneously at immense
speed – like mere specks of dust flying in the air. Even the Shrutis, describing
you as ‘neti neti’ [i.e. indescribable and unfathomable], ultimately perish in you
[i.e. fail to extol your complete glory].
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 10.87.41

The Vachanãmrut

605

one of his pauper-like servants were to come, even a great king would
obey his orders and act according to however he is told. Why?
Because the king has understood, ‘He is the servant of the powerful
Governor sahib.’ After all, egotism does not persist before one who is
more powerful than oneself. Similarly, if one has understood God to
be the master of all divine powers and wealth, then how can one
retain egotism before a sãdhu?”
9

Brahmãnand Swãmi agreed, “Mahãrãj, what you are saying is
correct. If a person has realised God and the knowledge of His
greatness, then he will never develop egotism, jealousy or anger
towards a sãdhu.”

10

Shriji Mahãrãj continued, “Just look, Uddhavji was so great and
so intelligent! Yet, because he had understood the greatness of God,
he asked to be reborn as a vine so that he could be touched by the
dust from the feet of the gopis who were so attached to God. Thus it
is stated:

•Ê‚Ê◊„UÙ ø⁄UáÊ⁄UáÊÈ¡È·Ê◊„¢ SÿÊ¢ flÎãŒÊflŸ Á∑§◊Á¬ ªÈÀ◊‹Ãı·œËŸÊ◊˜–
ÿÊ ŒÈSàÿ¡¢ Sfl¡Ÿ◊Êÿ¸¬Õ¢ ø Á„UàflÊ ÷¡È◊È¸∑È§ãŒ¬ŒflË¥ üÊÈÁÃÁ÷Áfl¸◊ÎÇÿÊ◊˜H i
Even Brahmã has said,

•„UÙ ÷ÊÇÿ◊„UÙ ÷ÊÇÿ¢ ŸãŒªÙ¬fl˝¡ı∑§‚Ê◊˜–
ÿÁã◊òÊ¢ ¬⁄U◊ÊŸãŒ¢ ¬ÍáÊZ ’˝rÊÔ ‚ŸÊÃŸ◊˜H ii
i

Ãsãm-aho charana-renu-jushãm-aham syãm vrundãvane kimapi gulmalataushadheenãm|
Yã dustyajam svajanam-ãryapatham cha hitvã bhejur-mukunda-padaveem
shrutibhir-vimrugyãm||
Those [gopis] – having forsaken the unforsakeable [bond] of their bodily
relations and the path of [dharma as prescribed for] the nobles – worshipped [i.e.
attained] the state of God [i.e. the state of highest liberation], which [even] the
Shrutis seek. O May I also become any of the shrubs, vines, or herbs in
Vrundãvan that are graced [i.e. touched] by the dust of their [i.e. the gopis’] feet!
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 10.47.61
ii Aho bhãgyam-aho bhãgyam nanda-gopa-vrajaukasãm|
Yan-mitram paramãnandam purnam brahma sanãtanam||
O Indeed how fortunate are Nand [the father of Krishna], the gopas and the
residents of Vraj – whose friend was the transcendental, eternal, perfect and
blissful Brahma [i.e. God]!

The Vachanãmrut

606

Because he had understood the greatness of God, even Brahmã spoke
in this manner. Therefore, if a person realises the greatness of God
and a sãdhu in this way, egotism, jealousy and anger can no longer
persist. Moreover, he would behave as a servant of servants before
them; and no matter however much they insult him, he would never
think of leaving their company and going away. Also, he would never
feel in his mind, ‘How long should I tolerate this? I will just stay at
home and engage in worship there.’ Thus, if one understands God’s
greatness in such a manner, egotism is eradicated.”
11

Then Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “If a devotee of God were placed
on a shuli due to some karma of his, and if at that time I were
standing next to him, the devotee would still not think, ‘It would be
good if God would free me from the pain of this shuli.’ In this
manner, he is not concerned about his own physical comforts.
Instead, he bears the hardships that befall him. As a result, God
becomes extremely pleased with such a devotee who is free of all
expectations.”

12

Shriji Mahãrãj then said, “I shall now tell you who attains the
bliss related to God. First, consider the following analogy: Water is
the very life of a fish. As long as it remains in water, it is able to
move, swim and perform all its activities; but the moment it leaves
the water, it loses its liveliness and dies. Similarly, if a person
believes the panchvishays to be his lifeline and believes them to be a
source of happiness, then when he is separated from them, he
becomes almost like a dead person. Such a person can never attain
the bliss of God. In fact, only a person who does not believe the
panchvishays to be his lifeline experiences God’s bliss; only he is able
to indulge in it; and only he attains it.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III-28 || 251 ||

Gadhadã III-29
Two Twenty-Year-Old Devotees of God
1

On the night of Posh sudi 2, Samvat 1885 [7 January 1829],
Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot that had been
placed on the platform in front of the medi in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 10.14.32

The Vachanãmrut

607

in Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time,
an assembly of sãdhus as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him.
2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj asked Shuk Muni a question:
“Suppose there are two satsangis. Both are twenty years of age, and
both possess the virtues of faith, affectionate bhakti, vairãgya and
dharma to an equal extent. But due to his prãrabdha, one of them
married, whereas the other did not find anyone and so remained a
sãnkhya-yogi. He also had a desire to marry, but he could not find
someone. Since neither of them had intense vairãgya from the
beginning, both have an acute desire for indulging in the vishays.
The question, then, is whose acute desire will be calmed, the
householder’s or the sãnkhya-yogi’s? When replying, keep in mind
that the Vedas state, ‘Only one who has intense vairãgya should
renounce from the stage of the brahmacharya ãshram; whereas one
whose vairãgya is feeble should become a householder for the purpose
of diminishing his intense desire to indulge in the vishays. Only
then should he accept the vãnprasth ãshram, and thereafter the
sannyãs ãshram.’ Therefore, answer carefully.”

3

Shuk Muni attempted to answer the question but was unable to
do so satisfactorily.

4

Answering the question Himself, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “The
householder is good, and the other who is a sãnkhya-yogi is bad.
Why? Because he lacks intense vairãgya. As a result, he does not
realise that the vishays are vain and false. Also, for the same reason,
he has no firmness in his conviction of his self being ãtmã. For this
reason, if he happens to leave the Satsang fellowship and encounter
vishays, he will become attached to them; if he does not come across
vishays, however, he will be obliged to come back into Satsang. On
the other hand, the householder will progress even if he has the
darshan of a sãdhu once every six months. Therefore, it is not
appropriate for one who is deficient in vairãgya to renounce; it is only
appropriate for someone who has intense vairãgya. If someone who is
deficient in vairãgya does renounce, then his renunciation will not
endure throughout his life. After one year, two years, or after even
ten years, difficulties will definitely arise in his renunciation.”

5

Thereupon Shuk Muni raised a doubt. He questioned, “Mahãrãj,
if the one whose vairãgya is weak listens to the greatness of God from
a sãdhu and ponders over it in his mind, then will he not develop
The Vachanãmrut

608

intense vairãgya? In fact, only very few people – due to their
prãrabdha – have intense vairãgya from the beginning. Generally,
though, we see that a person develops vairãgya even though he did
not possess it initially. How can this be accounted for?”
6

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “The answer to that is that one can
never develop intense vairãgya merely by contemplating by oneself,
or by any other means for that matter. However, if, in the same way
that one has affection for God, one develops deep affection for the
great Sant who possesses the four qualities of dharma, gnãn,
vairãgya and bhakti, then all of the actions one performs – seeing,
listening, talking, etc. – will be performed according to the wishes of
that great Sant whom one has attained, i.e., one will not do anything
which is against the Sant’s wish. In one’s mind, one constantly fears
behaving contrary to the wishes of that Sant; one feels, ‘If I do not
behave according to his wish, then he will not maintain affection for
me.’ That is why such a person will constantly behave according to
the Sant’s wishes.
Therefore, if someone has developed such
attachment for the Sant, then even if he does not have vairãgya, his
renunciation will endure till the end.

7

“Just see in our Satsang fellowship, since all of the males,
females and paramhansas are attached to Me, all the other females
observe religious vows to the same extent as the two or three senior
women. Why? Because in their mind, they realise, ‘If we do not
remain alert and observe the religious vows, the love which Mahãrãj
has for us will not remain, and He will become displeased.’ The
paramhansas also behave in the same manner. In fact, it is the
same for all of the other satsangis, brahmachãris and pãrshads. All
of the male and female devotees living far and wide are also alert in
observing the religious vows; they too feel, ‘If we do not behave
properly, Mahãrãj will become displeased.’
Thus, all of them
staunchly observe dharma out of affection for Me, even though they
may possess vairãgya to a greater or lesser degree.

8

“However, when I recently fell ill in Panchãlã, if something
serious had happened to Me, then everyone’s firmness would not have
remained as it is now. At such a time, one who has intense vairãgya
can remain within dharma; or one who has affectionately attached
one’s jiva to a person who has intense vairãgya can remain within
dharma; or one who keeps contact with Satsang and, realising God to
be antaryãmi, behaves according to the niyams that have been
The Vachanãmrut

609

prescribed for him can remain within dharma. Except for these,
others cannot remain within dharma. Thus, what I have just
explained is the only answer to the question I had asked.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III-29 || 252 ||

Gadhadã III-30
Constant Awareness of Five Thoughts
1

On Posh sudi Punam, Samvat 1885 [19 January 1829], Swãmi
Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting in the mandir of Shri
Gopinãthji in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed
entirely in white clothes. At that time, an assembly of munis as well
as devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Two beliefs which I like, and by
which My mind becomes pacified, are as follows: First, I like one who
is firmly convinced that there is a mass of divine light which is
chaitanya, and that the form of Shri Purushottam Bhagwãn forever
resides at the centre of that mass of light; and with that belief, he
worships and offers bhakti to that God. On the other hand, I do not
like one who believes in and worships only the chaitanya divine light;
nor do I like one who does not believe God to forever possess a form;
nor do I like one who does not worship God. Secondly, I like one who
endeavours in austerities, yoga, vairãgya, developing an aversion
towards the panchvishays, etc., in order to please God – without any
form of pretentiousness. Seeing such a person, My mind becomes
pleased, and I feel, ‘He should be congratulated for behaving in that
manner.’

3

“In addition, I have constant awareness of these five thoughts:
First, I am certainly going to die and leave this body; it is imminent.
In fact, I firmly feel, ‘I am going to die at this second, at this very
moment.’ Such awareness remains in times of happiness and
distress, pleasure and displeasure, in fact, amidst all activities. That
is the type of vairãgya I possess. The second thought is the constant
awareness that even though death is certain, this much work has
already been accomplished, and this much work is left, which I would
like to complete. The third is the thought of whether or not desires
for the panchvishays have been eradicated from My mind. In fact, I
feel, ‘If they have been eradicated, then why does activity regarding
that vishay still occur?
What if maybe they have not been
The Vachanãmrut

610

eradicated?’ In this manner, I am constantly suspicious of the mind.
The fourth is the concern of whether or not Muktãnand Swãmi and
the other senior sãdhus and senior devotees have eradicated their
desires for the panchvishays. In fact, I am constantly aware of
looking into everyone’s hearts to observe, ‘This person’s worldly
desires have been removed, but this person’s have not.’ Finally, the
fifth thought is that if I become dejected, then who knows where I
would run away to! In fact, I would probably leave My body.
Therefore, I believe I should not become dejected. Why? Because it is
good that by My association all of these men, women and
paramhansas happily sit to engage in the bhakti of God. Seeing them
engaged in such bhakti, I become extremely pleased in My mind. In
fact, I feel, ‘Everyone must die someday, but to perform bhakti in this
manner is the only great benefit of living.’ I am constantly aware of
this.”
4

In this manner, Shriji Mahãrãj cited His own behaviour as an
example for the enlightenment of His devotees, while in actual fact,
He Himself is the manifest form of Shri Purushottam Nãrãyan.
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III-30 || 253 ||

Gadhadã III-31
A Method of Meditation Using
the Example of a Shadow
1

On the evening of Mahã sudi 4, Samvat 1885 [7 February 1829],
Shriji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot on the veranda
outside the west-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.
He had tied a white feto around His head and was wearing a white
khes. He had also covered Himself with a red-bordered, white,
British cloth. At that time, some of the paramhansas were singing
devotional songs to the accompaniment of musical instruments, while
other paramhansas as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him in an assembly.

2

After the paramhansas sang the devotional song ‘„Á⁄U ◊⁄U „UÊ⁄U‹∑§Ë
‹∑§⁄UË...’i, Shriji Mahãrãj requested, “Please sing ‘¡◊ŸÊ∑§ ÃË⁄U ∆UÊ«UÙ...’i.”
i Hari mere hãralaki lakari…

The Vachanãmrut

611

The paramhansas then began singing that devotional song. In the
meantime, Shriji Mahãrãj sat contemplating.
3

Then He interrupted, “Please stop singing, and allow Me to talk
to you.” Continuing, He said, “What I am about to reveal to you is
not much, but it can be very beneficial for those who practise
meditation. In fact, I have never revealed this matter before.” Then
closing His gentle eyes, He began thinking, and thereafter said,
“There is a mass of divine light that is like countless millions of
moons, suns and flames of fire. That mass of light appears to be like
an ocean. The form of Purushottam Bhagwãn resides within that
luminous, brahmarup abode of God, and He Himself assumes an
avatãr from that form.

4

“What is that God like? Well, He transcends both the perishable
and the imperishable; He is the cause of all causes; and countless
millions of aksharrup muktas worship His holy feet.
Out of
compassion, that very same God is manifest and present before your
eyes in an incarnated form for the purpose of granting ultimate
liberation to jivas. Therefore, there is a great similarity between the
form residing in the abode of God and this incarnate form of Shri
Krishna.

5

“The vision of a person who meditates on this human form of
Shri Krishna develops extreme vairãgya for all charming sights other
than God and remains engrossed only in the charm of God. Then, he
does not notice even the slightest difference between the manifest
form of God and the form in His abode. The appearance and age of
that form, and the appearance and age of this form will appear
similar. In addition, the height and build of that form will appear to
be exactly the same as that of this form; not even the slightest
difference can be discerned between that form and this form. Indeed,
there appears to be a total oneness between them. In this manner,
there is not even the slightest difference between that form and this
form. In fact, both are one.

6

“When one meditates on that manifest form outwardly, in front
of the eyes, there is not the slightest difference between that form and
this form. But, if the meditator looks at that same form inwardly,
within his eyes, then that same form does not appear to be the same
i Jamunãke teera thãdo…

The Vachanãmrut

612

as before. In this case, it becomes the same size as the pupil of the
eye. Thereafter, when the meditator introspects, and meditates and
looks inward at the point of his throat and below, he does not see that
same form as the two forms he saw before. He sees that same form
as being extremely large, extremely tall, extremely fat, and
extremely frightening. For example, the shadow of a man formed by
the sun at noon would be almost the same length as the man’s body.
But when that same sun sets, the shadow becomes very elongated –
it does not remain the same length as the man’s body. Similarly, the
form of God also becomes as large as mentioned previously. Then
when the person sees that form within the buddhi, which resides in
the heart, and within his own jiva within the buddhi, he sees the
form as being the size of a thumb. It appears to have two arms or
four arms, but he does not see it in the three ways that he saw
before. Then, inwardly, the meditator sees the form to transcend his
jiva and sees it in the midst of a mass of divine light which is like
that of countless millions of suns, moons and flames of fire. Also, he
sees that form to be just like the form that he saw before his eyes; he
does not discern even the slightest difference between the two.
7

“Thus, the same form that is in Akshardhãm – which is
gunãtit – is manifest. There is no difference between the two. Just
as the form in the abode is gunãtit, the human form is also gunãtit.
The difference which was noticed earlier was, in fact, due to the
gunas of the different locations within the body; i.e., in the eyes there
is sattvagun; in the throat there is rajogun; even the jiva, which
resides within the buddhi, is full of gunas.”

8

After delivering this discourse, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Please
continue singing the devotional song which you were singing earlier.”

9

In this manner, Shriji Mahãrãj revealed Himself
Purushottam using the non-manifest form of God as an example.

as

|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III-31 || 254 ||

Gadhadã III-32
Committing Sins under the Pretext of
Knowing God’s Greatness
1

On Mahã sudi 5, Samvat 1885 [8 February 1829], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated cot on the
The Vachanãmrut

613

veranda outside the west-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in
Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time,
the singer-paramhansas were singing devotional songs related to the
spring season, while other munis as well as devotees from various
places had gathered before Him in an assembly.
2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj asked Muktãnand Swãmi and the
other sãdhus, “Please explain the meaning of the verse ‘Áfl·ÿÊ

ÁflÁŸflÃ¸ãÃ ÁŸ⁄UÊ„UÊ⁄USÿ ŒÁ „UŸ—…H’i.”
3

The sãdhus then explained the verse according to the
commentary written by Rãmãnuj.

4

Shriji Mahãrãj then added, “With reference to that verse, I have
formed the conviction that one who is in his youth should reduce his
diet and should eat and behave moderately. After all, when one’s diet
is reduced, physical strength also diminishes. Only then can the
indriyas be overcome; otherwise, they cannot. Having done that, if a
person enthusiastically engages his mind in the nine types of bhakti
of God, and himself lovingly engages in bhakti, then he will remain
in the Satsang fellowship till the end. But if he does not behave in
this manner, he will surely succumb to his indriyas and, sooner or
later, he will fall from Satsang. Even one who has mastered
samãdhi, like Govardhan, is afraid of this; so what can be said for
others?

5

“However, one’s diet cannot be controlled by merely observing
several fasts consecutively. That only leads to one’s desires and diet
increasing, because when one breaks a fast, one tends to eat twice as
much. But if a person begins to reduce his diet gradually, it can be
controlled. For example, even though the clouds cause rain to fall in
tiny drops, water still collects in a large quantity. Similarly, one
should control one’s diet gradually. Consequently, one’s indriyas will
also be controlled. Then, if one lovingly engages in bhakti, one will
remain in Satsang till the end. This is a fact.”

i Vishayã vinivartante nirãhãrasya dehinaha…||

The sense objects recede for a person who abstains from indulging in them.
However, the longing for them does not subside. The longing subsides [only]
when his vision reaches [i.e. he realises] the transcendental [i.e. God].
Bhagwad Gitã: 2.59

The Vachanãmrut

614

6

Shriji Mahãrãj then said, “How does a true devotee of God
understand God’s greatness? Well, he believes, ‘God, who possesses a
definite form, forever resides in His luminous Akshardhãm. He is
the cause and controller of everything, the antaryãmi within all and
the supreme master of countless millions of brahmãnds. Moreover,
His form is divine, blissful, and free from the gunas of mãyã.’
Understanding the manifest God in this way, he believes that with
the exception of God, all other worldly objects are absolutely vain and
perishable. In addition, he has love only for God, and he engages in
the nine types of bhakti. He also believes, ‘Kãl, mãyã, Brahmã, Shiv,
Surya, Chandra, etc., are powerful, yet even they act according to the
commands of that extremely great God.’ Understanding this, he
always behaves within the disciplines of dharma established by God
in order to please Him; never does he transgress those disciplines.

7

“On the other hand, a person who has a corrupted mind believes,
‘Such a great God is the uplifter of the wretched and the redeemer of
sinners. So why worry about slightly breaching the disciplines of
dharma? After all, God is capable of granting liberation.’ In this
manner, he does not hesitate in committing sins under the pretext of
knowing God’s greatness. Such a person should be considered wicked
and sinful. Such a person, even though he may superficially appear
to be a devotee, should not be considered a devotee, and one should
not remain in his company.
Only a person who has the
understanding described previously should be considered to be a
devotee, and only his company should be kept.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III-32 || 255 ||

Gadhadã III-33
Not Allowing the Mind to Become Affected by
Four Things
1

On Fãgun sudi 11, Samvat 1885 [16 March 1829], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting in the mandir of Shri Gopinãthji
in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in
white clothes. At that time, an assembly of paramhansas as well as
devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Then, addressing all of the paramhansas, Shriji Mahãrãj said,
“In the Satsang fellowship, there are only a few devotees whose mind
The Vachanãmrut

615

would not be affected by wealth, property, women, children, etc., and
who would not develop faith in those who fulfill the desires related to
those things. In fact, there cannot be many devotees who are like
this.” Saying this, Shriji Mahãrãj continued, “This Muktãnand
Swãmi and Gopãlãnand Swãmi are like that, because in no way
would they become impressed by anyone, no matter how great he
may be – even if he were to show miracles.
3

“What are the characteristics of a person who will not be
influenced by anyone? Well, such a person believes, ‘I am the ãtmã,
which is distinct from the body; I am luminous and characterised by
pure existence. Moreover, the manifest form of God constantly
resides within my self. Except for the form of God, all worldly forms
are asatya and full of countless flaws.’ A person who has such
vairãgya and who thoroughly understands the greatness of God will
never harbour any kind of doubts in his mind. But having said that,
that understanding is very difficult to cultivate. Because even
though these two sãdhus are so great, if they were to receive an
abundance of honour, or if heaps of rupees and gold coins were to be
placed before them, or if they were to encounter attractive women,
then even though they are renunciants, they would not be able to
maintain their integrity. In fact, if they do encounter those objects,
then it is doubtful whether they would remain on par with even the
lowest of our renunciants. Why? Because the very association of
those objects is such. For example, see how pious all of us sitting
here are. However, if we were to drink bottles of liquor, we would not
remain so composed. Similarly, the association of those objects
certainly has an effect on a person. Therefore, only if one does not
associate with those objects can one be saved from them. In fact,
even before one encounters them, one should be cautious, lest one
encounters them. Moreover, it is a well-known fact of the scriptures
that only God is unaffected by their association. That is why it has
been stated: ‘´§Á·¢ ŸÊ⁄UÊÿáÊ◊ÎÃ…H’i as well as ‘…ÿ˘ãÿ SflÃ—¬Á⁄UNUÃÊŒÁ¬

Á’èÿÁÃ S◊H’i.”

i Rushim nãrãyanam-rute…||

Of the progeny of Brahmã [i.e. Marichi, etc.], and their progeny [i.e. Kashyap,
etc.], and their progeny [i.e. humans and deities] – whose mind in this world,

The Vachanãmrut

616

4

Thereafter Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Who can be called an ekãntik
bhakta of Vãsudev Bhagwãn? Well, one who possesses the qualities
of swadharma, gnãn, vairãgya, and unparalleled bhakti towards
Vãsudev Bhagwãn coupled with knowledge of his greatness can be
called an ekãntik bhakta.

5

“Furthermore, regarding such a person’s ultimate fate, it is said
that he ‘enters’ Vãsudev Bhagwãn. But what is meant by ‘entering’?
Well, that devotee has affection for the divine form of Vãsudev
Bhagwãn, who dwells within a mass of divine light. Due to that
affection, he has constant awareness of the form of Vãsudev Bhagwãn
in his mind, and he behaves as if he is infatuated by that form.
Remaining in that state, he also engages in the service of Vãsudev
Bhagwãn outwardly. For example, even though Lakshmiji remains
in the heart of Vãsudev Bhagwãn symbolically and through her
profound love, she also outwardly serves him in the form of a female.
The ‘entering’ of an ekãntik bhakta into Vãsudev Bhagwãn should be
understood in a similar manner.

6

“Even at present, the attachment a devotee has for the ten types
of bhakti – engaging in discourses related to God, singing devotional
songs, chanting His holy name, etc. – as well as the attachment he
has for swadharma, vairãgya, ãtmã-realisation, keeping the company
of the Sant and realising the greatness of God is such that he can in
no way do without them. For example, one who is addicted to opium
cannot live without it. Even though that opium is extremely bitter, a
person who is addicted to it cannot live without it. Or, if a person is
addicted to alcohol, then even though his throat burns whenever he
drinks alcohol, he cannot live without it. Even if someone were to
offer him many rupees he would not accept them, because his
besides that of Nãrãyan Rishi, can be distinguished as being unaffected by the
mãyã [i.e. alluring charm] of women?
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 3.31.37
i …Ye’nye svataha parihrutãd-api bibhyati sma||
O Master of the Indriyas [God]! You are indeed the lord of the whole mobile and
immobile world, because even though you indulge in the various [sense] objects
created by the imbalance in the gunas of mãyã, you remain unaffected [by
them]. Apart from you, [though,] others still fear [the association of the sense
objects] – even though they have renounced them.
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 11.6.17

The Vachanãmrut

617

addiction is more dear to him. Why? Because that vice has become
ingrained in his jiva. Similarly, if a person was addicted to the
bhakti of God and other such activities, then even if he remains
under the influence of any type of bad company, he would not be able
to live without engaging in those devotional activities. Moreover, his
mind would not be pleased in engaging in any other activities. Such
a devotee of God whose jiva has become engrossed in God’s bhakti and
other such activities, and who is extremely eager to perform only
those activities, can also be said to have ‘entered’ Vãsudev Bhagwãn.
7

“So what are the characteristics of such a devotee of God? Well,
except for the service of God, if he does not wish for even the four
types of liberation i , how can he desire anything else? Such a person
should be known as an ekãntik bhakta because he has no desire for
anything. A person who is not like this, at times, enjoys engaging in
the bhakti of God; but if he encounters evil company, he will forget
bhakti and begin to behave immorally. Such a person should be
known to be a fake devotee and a person who believes his self to be
the body. He is not a true devotee and cannot be trusted.”

8

Then Shriji Mahãrãj continued, “If a devotee of God is vulnerable
to women, wealth, swabhãvs and the belief that one is the body, then
even if he is engaged in the bhakti of God, his bhakti cannot be
trusted; he will surely encounter hindrances in it. Why? Because if
at some time he happens to come across women or wealth, then there
will be no stability in his bhakti, and he will become engrossed in
them. Also, if a person believes his self to be the body, then when he
suffers due to some illness, or if he is unable to obtain food and
clothing, or if a command to observe a difficult religious vow is given,
then again, his bhakti will be disturbed. In fact, he will become
frustrated and will not be able to think; he will begin to behave
immorally. Also, if he has a certain swabhãv, and if the Sant
reprimands him instead of allowing him to behave according to his
swabhãv, i.e., makes him behave contrary to it, then also he will
become disturbed. Then, if he cannot remain in the company of the
Sant, how will he be able to maintain bhakti? Therefore, he who

i The four types of liberation as described in Gadh I-43.2 are: (1) to reside in the

realm of God; (2) to stay near God; (3) to assume a form similar to that of God;
and (4) to attain divine powers similar to God’s powers.

The Vachanãmrut

618

wishes to develop resolute bhakti should not be vulnerable in these
four aspects. If there is a flaw in these four, it should be slowly
eradicated with understanding.
Only then can one perform
unflinching bhakti of Vãsudev Bhagwãn. What I have just said is
absolutely true; there is no doubt in it whatsoever.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III-33 || 256 ||

Gadhadã III-34
Maintaining Desires Only for God
1

On Chaitra sudi 3, Samvat 1885 [6 April 1829], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting in the mandir of Shri Gopinãthji
in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in
white clothes. At that time, an assembly of paramhansas as well as
devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Then Shuk Muni asked Shriji Mahãrãj, “There appear to be two
means by which desires for only God, and not for any worldly object,
remain. One is love for God, and the other is vairãgya coupled with
gnãn. These are the two means. For one who does not practise these
two means firmly but who does have faith in God and the conviction
of God, is there a third means by which he can maintain desires only
for God and not for anything else?”

3

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said in reply, “That is a good question
because it is true that only by those two means do desires only for
God, and not for anything else, remain. If a person does not practise
those two means, then his desires for objects other than God will not
be eradicated. As a result, he remains unhappy in life. But since he
has faith in God, God will grant him liberation after death
nonetheless.

4

“However, just like those two means, there is also a third means
for eradicating desires for objects other than God. What is it? Well,
it is to diligently observe the prescribed niyams. Just what are those
niyams? Some are related to the duties of one’s caste and ãshram.
Just as there are niyams for an ãtmanivedi sãdhu and a
brahmachãri, similarly, even though a person is not an ãtmanivedi,
he should still follow the niyams of not seeing women and not
listening to talks about them. In this manner, he should strictly and
diligently observe the niyams related to forsaking the panchvishays.
The Vachanãmrut

619

Also, he should physically serve God and His Bhakta, and he should
listen to spiritual discourses related to God. In this manner, if he
observes niyams in the form of engaging in the nine types of bhakti,
then his mind will also begin to entertain pious thoughts. So, if a
person behaves according to these two niyams, then as a result, even
if he does not have vairãgya or love for God, they will develop; he will
become extremely powerful; impure desires for objects will be
eradicated; and only desires for God will flourish day by day.”
5

Again, Shuk Muni asked Shriji Mahãrãj, “Mahãrãj, it seems
anger arises when one’s desire for a certain object or one’s sense of
my-ness for something is violated by someone. When a desire, i.e., a
craving, is not satisfied, then that desire results in anger. So, it can
be said that such a person has developed a swabhãv wherein anger
can arise. Is it possible, though, that anger will not arise even in
such situations?”

6

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “The great Sant – who, by God’s
command or by his own wish after understanding God’s greatness
according to the scriptures, has made a pious resolution to keep
innumerable people within the disciplines of dharma and to lead
them onto the path of God and is active in that respect – may express
anger on a person who infringes the disciplines of dharma and follows
adharma.
Why?
Because that person has infringed on the
Sant’s resolve. Therefore, if the sãdhu does not express anger and
does not reprimand that person in order to teach him to remain
within the disciplines of dharma, then that person will continue to
infringe those disciplines and will not progress. Therefore, anger
expressed for this reason is beneficial; there is nothing unsuitable
about it. Why? Because thousands of people have taken the refuge of
the great Sant who has resolved to take this path. So how can they
possibly not be somewhat reprimanded?

7

“Anger will not arise, however, if one shuns the very cause of
that anger. Obviously, anger will not arise, if one is travelling alone
in the jungle; but how can the great Sant do that? After all, he has
understood from the scriptures the great fruits involved in guiding
countless people towards God by discourses – in order that they
attain liberation. Similarly, he has also understood the importance of
observing God’s injunctions. Therefore, even though he may express
anger, he still does not forsake his pious resolution.

The Vachanãmrut

620

8

“One who has developed attachment with the great Sant, has
understood that his personal interest of attaining liberation can be
realised through the Sant and believes, ‘Only through this Sant will
I benefit’ – then even though he may have a swabhãv in the form of
anger, he will never get angry on that great Sant. In fact, he will
surely forsake his swabhãv. So, anger can also be eradicated in this
way.

9

“On the other hand, he who becomes angry on a sãdhu over the
exchange of some worthless objects has simply not understood the
greatness of the sãdhu, or the true path of a sãdhu. If he had
understood it, then he would not become angry over such worthless
objects.
In fact, even if such a person is intelligent and
understanding, if he does become angry on a sãdhu for worthless
objects, then his intellect should be considered to be like that of a
king’s minister – adept only in worldly affairs. He does not possess
the intellect of a true sãdhu.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III-34 || 257 ||

Gadhadã III-35
Forcefully Altering One’s Innate Nature;
God Is Maligned When His Bhakta Is Maligned
1

On Chaitra sudi 9, Samvat 1885 [12 April 1829], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting in the mandir of Shri Gopinãthji
in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in
white clothes. At that time, an assembly of sãdhus as well as
devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Then Shuk Muni asked Shriji Mahãrãj, “Mahãrãj, how can we
recognise that a person has such a firm refuge of God and His Bhakta
that it will in no way falter – regardless of the extent of hardships he
may have to face; regardless of any physical happiness or distress;
and regardless of whether he faces honour or insult, or even adverse
circumstances? Please also describe what type of thoughts such a
person has in his mind, as well as how he behaves physically.”

3

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said in reply, “If a devotee realises
that only God is great, but he does not believe anything else to be
greater than God; and if he also believes that everything except God
is vain; and if he does not become disturbed or annoyed when God or
The Vachanãmrut

621

the Sant attempts to forcefully alter his innate nature or when they
do not allow him to behave according to his nature; and if he can
forsake his nature, no matter how ingrained it may be, and follow the
commands of God and the Sant in a straightforward manner – then
that devotee’s acceptance of the refuge of God will not falter,
regardless of how adverse the circumstances may be.”
4

Shuk Muni then queried, “Such a person must become
disturbed, because when anyone’s nature is forcefully altered, one
naturally becomes disturbed.
But the question is, are there
differences in the types of disturbances that are experienced, or not?”

5

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “If a person is disturbed when his
nature is forcefully altered, and if he then finds faults with himself
rather than with God or the Sant, then he is good. However, instead
of finding faults with himself, if a person perceives faults in God and
the Sant, then his future is doubtful; i.e., there is no stability in such
a person’s refuge of God.”

6

Again, Shuk Muni asked, “If God or the Sant have never
attempted to twist one’s nature, how can one realise in one’s own
mind, ‘If they do attempt to do so at some time in the future, I will
become disturbed.’? After all, how can one be sure of something that
one has not experienced?”

7

Hearing this, Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “One should reflect upon
the thoughts that occur in one’s mind. For example, ‘In my mind,
besides the thoughts of God, there are also thoughts related to the
panchvishays; of these, for which objects do I have powerful desires
and for which do I have strong cravings?’ If a person contemplates in
this manner, he can realise himself as he truly is; otherwise, he
cannot. During that contemplation, he should also realise, ‘I have
very strong desires for this object, and I am striving to attain it.
But, when the Sant attempts to have me forsake it, I will become
disturbed.’ In this way, he becomes clear about his own self. If his
nature is stubborn, and God or the Sant do not attempt to alter it,
then he will survive in the Satsang fellowship; however, if they do
attempt to alter it, then he will definitely fall. Ultimately, then, he
will become extremely disturbed and will fall from Satsang.”

8

Thereafter Shriji Mahãrãj said, “The scriptures claim that to
malign the Sant is the gravest of all sins. What is the reason for
this? Well, it is because Shri Krishna Bhagwãn himself resides in
the heart of that Sant. Therefore, when one maligns the Sant, one
The Vachanãmrut

622

maligns God as well. After all, when one maligns the Sant, God, who
resides within his heart – is hurt. In such a case, the sin of
maligning God is an even graver sin. Therefore, it is said that to
malign the Sant is the gravest of all sins.
9

“Having said that though, Kansa, Shishupãl, Putnã and other
demons spited God, yet God still granted them liberation like that of
a devotee. Why was this? Because even though it was out of
animosity, those demons did contemplate upon God. Therefore God
felt, ‘Those demons thought of Me and thus associated with Me, albeit
out of animosity. So I should grant them liberation.’ These cases
should be taken as examples of God’s compassion. One should also
realise, ‘If God granted them liberation even though they sought the
refuge of God through animosity, why would God not grant liberation
to a devotee who seeks His refuge by offering bhakti and who pleases
Him by that bhakti? Of course, He will.’

10

“The intention of those who have given the scriptures is to
inspire people towards the bhakti of God by showing God’s abundant
compassion; their intention was not to allow people to behave against
God’s wishes like those demons. Therefore, a person who spites God
by keeping animosity towards Him and who behaves against His
wishes should definitely be considered to be a demon – because that is
the way of demons. However, one should behave only in a manner
that will please God; one should engage in bhakti and please Him and
His Bhakta. That is the way of devotees of God.”

11

Shuk Muni then asked further, “Mahãrãj, what are the
characteristics of a Sant who is such that by maligning him, God
residing within his heart is also maligned, and by serving him, God
is served?”

12

Shriji Mahãrãj thought for a while and then answered out of
compassion: “First of all, the foremost characteristic is that he never
believes God to be formless. He understands God to eternally possess
a form and to be divine. In fact, no matter how many of the Purãns,
Upanishads, Vedas, or other scriptures he may hear – if ever he
comes across the idea of God being formless, he thinks, ‘Either I have
not understood the true meaning of the scriptures, or there may be
some other purpose behind such words; but God indeed always
possesses a form.’ If he does not understand God to possess a form,
then his upãsanã cannot be considered resolute. Besides, if God did
not possess a form, then He could not be called the all-doer – just as
The Vachanãmrut

623

ãkãsh cannot be called the doer; nor could He be said to reside in one
location. Thus God eternally possesses a form. In addition, He is the
creator, sustainer and destroyer of countless brahmãnds; He is
forever present in His Akshardhãm; He is the lord of all; and He is
manifest here before your eyes. The aforementioned Sant always has
this understanding; but this understanding of his is never shaken in
any way or under any circumstances.
13

“Secondly, he engages himself in the ekãntik bhakti of God.
Moreover, when he sees someone else engaged in spiritual discourses,
singing devotional songs, chanting the holy name of God, etc., he
becomes extremely pleased in his mind.

14

“Thirdly, when he stays amongst devotees, he does not allow any
of his swabhãvs to interfere. In fact, he will forsake his swabhãvs,
but he will not leave the company of the devotees of God. If the Sant
happens to denounce his swabhãvs, he does not bear contempt
towards the Sant. Instead, he finds faults with his own swabhãvs,
but never does he become upset or even think of departing from the
company of the devotees of God. In this manner, he remains within
the fellowship of devotees.

15

“Fourthly, when he comes across any precious item such as an
expensive piece of clothing, some delicious food, clean water, etc., he
thinks, ‘It would be nice to give this to a devotee of God.’ He would
give away the items to him and be happy.

16

“Fifth, the devotees in whose company he is staying do not feel of
him, ‘He has being staying with us for so many years, yet we have
not been able to truly understand him; and who knows what he is
really like? It is difficult to judge him.’ He would not be like that.
Instead, he would be such that everyone would know him outwardly
and inwardly, and they would feel, ‘He is definitely like this.’ He
would be of such a frank nature.

17

“Sixth, even if he is of a quiet nature, he would not like the
company of kusangis; and if he does happen to come across them, he
would, in fact, become infuriated. In this manner, he has a natural
dislike for the company of those who are non-believers.

18

“Thus, it should be known that God Himself resides in the heart
of a Sant who possesses these six qualities. By maligning such a
Sant, one commits a sin equivalent to maligning God; and if one

The Vachanãmrut

624

serves such a Sant, one earns merits equivalent to having served
God.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III-35 || 258 ||

Gadhadã III-36
The Most Extraordinary Spiritual Endeavour for
Liberation
1

On Vaishãkh sudi 1, Samvat 1885 [4 May 1829], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj rode on horseback from Dãdã Khãchar’s
darbãr in Gadhadã and arrived at Lakshmivãdi. There, He sat on a
platform within the grounds. He was dressed entirely in white
clothes. At that time, an assembly of paramhansas as well as
devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Then Shriji Mahãrãj asked all of the paramhansas and devotees,
“What is the most extraordinary spiritual endeavour for the
liberation of the jiva, which, if practised, will surely guarantee
liberation and prevent all other obstacles from hindering that
liberation? Also, what is the greatest obstacle in that endeavour for
liberation, on account of which one would certainly fall from the path
of liberation? Please answer both of these questions.”

3

Everyone answered according to their understanding, but the
question was not answered satisfactorily.

4

So then Shriji Mahãrãj said in reply, “The most extraordinary
spiritual endeavour for liberation is to understand Purushottam
Bhagwãn, who is seated amidst the mass of light of Brahma, as
eternally having a form. Furthermore, understanding that all
avatãrs emanate from Him, one should accept the refuge of the
manifest form of God by any means possible. One should also offer
bhakti to that God while observing dharma, as well as associate with
a Sant possessing such bhakti. That is the most extraordinary
spiritual endeavour for liberation. One encounters no hindrances
along that path.

5

“A major obstacle in practising that spiritual endeavour is
keeping the company of shushka-Vedãntis. Which obstacles arise
when a person keeps their company? Well, initially, he develops
affection for them. That affection develops due to the Vedãntis’
goodwill. For example, if a person has saved someone’s life by giving
The Vachanãmrut

625

him some food during a famine, then that person would naturally
develop affection for him. In this way, one develops affection for a
person who has helped one. Similarly, those shushka-Vedãntis would
point out advantages, such as, ‘The ãtmã does not undergo births and
deaths, and it is formless. In fact, regardless of the number of sins
one may commit, the ãtmã remains immune to those flaws.’
Pointing out such advantages, they denounce the form of God. That
is a major obstacle since it leads to the rejection of God’s form.
Therefore, one should never keep the company of shushka-Vedãntis –
they are absolutely ignorant. In fact, there is no greater obstacle on
the path of bhakti than this.”
6

Thereafter, Shriji Mahãrãj returned to Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr.
There, He sat on a large, decorated cot on the veranda outside the
east-facing rooms and said, “I have heard all of the scriptures and
have formed a principle. I have also travelled throughout this land
and seen many realised yogis.” So saying, He narrated the stories of
Gopãldãsji and other sãdhus. He then continued by saying, “I believe
that it is impossible to see the ãtmã and Brahma without the
upãsanã and meditation of God’s form. Only through upãsanã can
the ãtmã and Brahma be seen; without it, they cannot be seen. In
fact, wishing to see the ãtmã and Brahma without upãsanã is like
attempting to lick the sky with one’s tongue; even if one tries for a
hundred years, one will never be able to taste it as sour or salty.
Similarly, the ãtmã and Brahma simply cannot be seen without the
upãsanã of the form of God – regardless of the efforts one may resort
to. Furthermore, the scriptures’ mentioning of the possibility of
ãtmã-realisation through nirbiji Sãnkhya and Yoga is irrelevant – I
have not seen anyone do so, nor is the claim in accordance with My
experience. Therefore, the claim is false.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III-36 || 259 ||

i Literally, ‘n irbij’ means ‘seedless’, but here it should be understood to mean

‘without the association of God’.

The Vachanãmrut

626

Gadhadã III-37
Objects Enjoyed Previously Are Remembered in
Times of Poverty
1

On Vaishãkh sudi 3, Samvat 1885 [6 May 1829], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a small, embroidered cloth on
the veranda outside the north-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr
in Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white clothes. At that time,
an assembly of paramhansas as well as devotees from various places
had gathered before Him.

2

Then, addressing all of the sãdhus and devotees, Shriji Mahãrãj
said, “Once a person has thoroughly attained the gnãn of God, then
even if the factors of place, time, action and company become adverse
for him, his gnãn does not diminish in the least. Take, for example,
the analogy of a great king or a millionaire. If he happens to lose his
status due to his prãrabdha and becomes poor, and because of that if
he has only cheap food to eat, such as low-quality grains, or the
spinach of dodi, or kothã, or berries, or boiled pipal fruit, etc., then
he would certainly eat it; but he would also recall the expensive
delicacies that he formerly ordered and ate – items which no one else
could even obtain. In his mind he would think, ‘I used to eat all
those delicacies in the past, whereas now I eat such common food.’ In
this manner, whenever he eats, he would recall this. However, if a
person has been eating such common food from the beginning, and if
he becomes even poorer, then he continues to eat the same type of
food as before. So what does he have to recall? Nothing.

3

“Correspondingly, once a person has thoroughly known in his
own mind the bliss of God and the bliss of worshipping God, then
even if he can no longer remain within the fellowship and has to
leave, he will endure happiness and misery according to his
prãrabdha while remembering that bliss; he will not forget it. But
what is there to recall for someone who has not known that bliss of
God and who has not experienced it? Nothing. Such a person, in
fact, is like an animal.”

4

Continuing, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Now I shall narrate to you the
gnãn of the form of God. No deity, human or anything created from
Prakruti, possesses a form like God. In addition, kãl devours
everything except God; that is to say, kãl’s powers are incapable of
affecting God. This is what God is like. In fact, only God is like God;
The Vachanãmrut

627

no one else can even compare to Him. Also, a devotee in the abode of
God who has attained attributes similar to God also possesses a form
similar to that of God. Nevertheless, that devotee is still a mukta,
and God is, after all, Purushottam. Indeed, God is supreme amongst
everyone and is fit to be worshipped by everyone. He is also their
master. No one, however, can fathom the greatness of that God. He
has a divine form, is nirgun, and is worthy of being meditated upon.
In fact, that form of God is such that a person who meditates upon
Him becomes nirgun himself.
5

“Moreover, while staying in one place – in His abode – God
resides by way of His anvay form as the antaryãmi and the giver of
the deserved fruits of karmas to all of the jivas in countless
brahmãnds. Indeed, He is the very life of all jivas; without Him,
those jivas are not capable of doing anything or indulging in
anything.

6

“In addition, that God is the master of all yogic powers. Just as
a person who has attained yogic powers can obtain with his own
hands any object even in Brahmalok while sitting here, similarly,
God, using His yogic powers, performs all activities while staying in
one place only. Also, for example, the fire that is latent within wood
and stone is different from the wood and stone themselves. Similarly,
God dwells within all jivas, but His form is different from the jivas.

7

“That God Himself, possessing countless divine powers, becomes
like a human for the purpose of granting liberation to the jivas. If a
person cultivates the gnãn of that form of God in this way, then if he
has offered bhakti to that God and has fully experienced the bliss of
that gnãn and bhakti as it really is at least once in his jiva, he will
never forget it. In fact, regardless of whatever happiness or distress
comes his way, he does not forget the experience of that bliss of God’s
form, just as the king in a state of poverty does not forget the
happiness of his past.

8

“Why do I tell you this? Because currently, all of you are
present in the Satsang fellowship; but, due to adverse circumstances
or adverse prãrabdha, if one no longer remains in Satsang, then if
one has understood this fact, one’s jiva can still attain liberation.
Moreover, if one has such a conviction, one will never feel, ‘I will not
attain liberation.’ After all, to continuously remain in Satsang is
indeed extremely difficult. In fact, to physically behave as described
is also rare. But if a person someday happens to leave Satsang, then
The Vachanãmrut

628

even if he cannot physically behave likewise at that time, his jiva will
still benefit greatly if he has understood this fact. That is why I have
delivered this discourse.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III-37 || 260 ||

Gadhadã III-38
The Sãnkhya Scriptures and Others;
Remaining Forever Happy
1

On Vaishãkh sudi 14, Samvat 1885 [17 May 1829], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting in the mandir of Shri Gopinãthji
in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in
white clothes. At that time, an assembly of paramhansas as well as
devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Having pondered over the
Sãnkhya scriptures as well as other scriptures, I have formed the
conviction that all forms that are the result of the entities evolved
from mãyã are false. Why? Because all those forms will be destroyed
by kãl. Conversely, the form of God in Akshardhãm and the form of
the muktas – the attendants of God – are all satya, divine and
extremely luminous. Also, the form of that God and those muktas is
two-armed like that of a human being, and it is characterised by
eternal existence, consciousness and bliss. That God, residing in
Akshardhãm, is served by those muktas with various types of divine
articles, and He is always present there to bestow supreme bliss upon
those muktas.

3

“It is that same supreme Purushottam Bhagwãn who manifests
on this earth out of compassion – for the purpose of granting
liberation to the jivas. He is presently visible before everyone; He is
your Ishtadev; and He accepts your service. In fact, there is
absolutely no difference between the manifest form of Purushottam
Bhagwãn visible before you and the form of God residing in
Akshardhãm; i.e., both are one. Moreover, this manifest form of
Purushottam Bhagwãn is the controller of all, including Akshar. He
is the lord of all of the ishwars and the cause of all causes. He reigns
supreme, and He is the cause of all of the avatãrs. Moreover, He is
worthy of being worshipped single-mindedly by all of you. The many

The Vachanãmrut

629

previous avatãrs of this God are worthy of being bowed down to and
worthy of reverence.”
4

Shriji Mahãrãj then explained, “Greed for wealth and other
things, desires to associate with women, attachment of the tongue to
various tastes, the belief that one is the body, affection for kusangis
and attachment to one’s relatives – one who possesses these six
characteristics will never become happy, either in this life or even
after death. Therefore, one who desires to be happy should eradicate
such swabhãvs, maintain nivrutti, and not keep the company of
equals. One should also attach one’s jiva to the Bhakta of God – the
great Sant – who does not identify his self with the body, who
possesses vairãgya, and who feels that he has transgressed a major
injunction of God even if he has transgressed a minor injunction.
One should act according to his command by thought, word and deed.
Also, one should certainly avoid the vishays, and in no way should
one allow them to come near by abandoning one’s niyams. If one does
begin to associate with the vishays, one will certainly fall. This
should be accepted as a universal principle.”
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III-38 || 261 ||

Gadhadã III-39
Vishalyakarani Herbal Medicine
1

On Ãshãdh vadi 10, Samvat 1886 [25 July 1829], Shriji Mahãrãj
was sitting on the veranda outside the east-facing rooms of Dãdã
Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã. He was dressed entirely in white
clothes. At that time, an assembly of paramhansas as well as
devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Addressing all of the paramhansas and satsangis, Shriji
Mahãrãj said, “What is God’s mãyã? Mãyã is nothing but the sense
of I-ness towards the body and my-ness towards anything related to
the body. These should be eradicated. Anyone who eradicates mãyã
can be said to have transcended mãyã. In fact, it is the principle of
all of the scriptures that one should eradicate mãyã and develop love
for God. This principle must be understood – either today or some
time in the future. Great devotees such as Hanumãn, Nãrad,
Prahlãd have also asked from God, ‘Protect us from mãyã in the form
of I-ness and my-ness, and may we develop love for You. May we also
have the company of the Sant who has transcended mãyã and has
The Vachanãmrut

630

love for You; and may we develop affection and a sense of my-ness
towards him as well.’ Therefore, we too should do the same and ask
for the same, as well as do shravan, manan and nididhyãs on this
principle.”
3

Then continuing, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “A devotee of God requires
the strength of two things: ãtmã-realisation and the greatness of God.
What is ãtmã-realisation? It is to realise the ãtmã as being distinct
from the body. If while staying among the sãdhus there happens to
be a quarrel for some reason, or if the feelings of I-ness and my-ness,
or vicious natures such as egotism, anger, avarice, lust, matsar,
jealousy, cravings for taste, etc., prevail, then one who does not
regard oneself as the ãtmã perceives flaws in the sãdhus. This would
be extremely detrimental for him. That is why one should realise
one’s true self as being the ãtmã, distinct from the body.

4

“That ãtmã is neither a Brãhmin, nor a Kshatriya, nor a Kanbi.
It is no one’s son and no one’s father. It belongs to no caste and to no
class. It is radiant like the sun and fire; but it is also full of
consciousness. The flames of fire and the rays of the sun are jad
because they do not move when touched by the finger. However,
when an ant is touched by a finger, it moves and turns back. This
implies that the ãtmã is full of consciousness. It is said to be similar
to the sun or to fire, but that is merely because its form is similar in
radiance.

5

“The ãtmã has passed through countless life forms. In fact, it is
said that a person has drunk as much milk from his mothers as
there is water in the ocean. In those lives, the ãtmã has experienced
death in countless ways, yet it has not perished. It has remained as
it is. So, if it did not perish in that state of ignorance when it
regarded itself as the body, how shall it perish now that we have its
gnãn? Thus, we should realise that ãtmã as our true self.

6

“Furthermore, how should the greatness of God be understood?
Well, God is the Lord of the lords of countless brahmãnds. However,
the brahmãnds of which He is lord are insignificant compared to
Him. Therefore, it is said:

The Vachanãmrut

631

lÈÃ¬ÿ ∞fl Ã Ÿ ÿÿÈ⁄UãÃ◊ŸãÃÃÿÊ
àfl◊Á¬ ÿŒãÃ⁄UÊá«UÁŸøÿÊ ŸŸÈ ‚Êfl⁄UáÊÊ—– i
7

Within each brahmãnd there are Brahmã, Vishnu and Shiv, as
well as the pruthvi with its seven dwips, seven oceans, Meru, and
Lokãlok and other mountains. The brahmãnds also contain the 14
realms, the eight barriers5, and many other things. God is the lord of
countless such brahmãnds.
For example, one can realise the
eminence of an emperor of the world, even though his villages can be
counted. But the eminence of God is much greater because even
those countless brahmãnds are insignificant to Him. So then, of
what significance can the beings of those brahmãnds be before God?
Of no significance at all; they are utterly insignificant.

8

“Furthermore, in those brahmãnds, what are the pleasures of
the panchvishays that God has given to the jivas like? Well, those
pleasures seem extremely rare; so much so, that many have given
their heads for them. However, the bliss of God’s own form and of
His abode are indeed outstanding. The pleasures of the worldly
vishays are dependant on other factors and must be experienced
distinctly. In comparison, God is the reservoir of all forms of bliss.
Moreover, the bliss of God is imperishable and extremely divine. For
this, consider the following analogy: An extremely wealthy man
enjoys a great variety of food at home. Then, after finishing the
meal, he throws a leftover piece of rotlo to a dog. In this case, the
leftover piece of rotlo can be considered utterly inferior, and the
various delicacies that the wealthy man enjoys can be considered to
be full of pleasure. In the same way, God has given the countless
jivas of the brahmãnds the pleasures of the panchvishays. But they
i Dyupataya eva te na yayur-antam anantatayã

Tvamapi yad-antarãnda-nichayã nanu sãvaranãhã|
Even the masters of the higher realms [i.e. deities such as Brahmã] cannot
fathom your greatness – because it is endless. [In fact,] neither can you yourself
[fathom your own greatness]. Indeed, in your each and every hair countless
brahmãnds accompanied with their barriers fly simultaneously at immense
speed – like mere specks of dust flying in the air. Even the Shrutis, describing
you as ‘neti neti’ [i.e. indescribable and unfathomable], ultimately perish in you
[i.e. fail to extol your complete glory].
Shrimad Bhãgwat: 10.87.41

The Vachanãmrut

632

are inferior like the piece of rotlo thrown to the dog, whereas the bliss
of God Himself is far superior.
9

“Even so, God grants a great deal of happiness to the jiva during
the state of deep sleep. During deep sleep, one is relieved of even
severe pain, and instead, one experiences profound peace.

10

“Even the great such as Brahmã, Shiv, Lakshmiji, Rãdhãji,
Nãrad, Shuk, the Sanakãdik, and the nine Yogeshwars apply the
dust of God’s holy feet upon their heads. They put aside all of their
self-importance and constantly offer bhakti to Him.

11

“Moreover, just look at the diverse creation created by God!
What ingenuity He has used! Just see, a human is born of a human
and an animal from an animal; a tree from a tree and an ant from an
ant. Also, no matter how intelligent someone may be, no one is
capable of replacing a destroyed part of someone’s body exactly as it
was before. God possesses innumerable such skills. Therefore, by
realising such greatness of God and realising Him to be blissful, one
develops vairãgya for all things and love for God alone.

12

“If one attains the gnãn of one’s jivãtmã and the gnãn of God’s
greatness as mentioned earlier, then even if one has somehow become
attached to any sort of pleasures of the panchvishays, one would not
remain bound by them, but would, in fact, break that bondage and
withdraw from them. How, then, can one who forsakes the pleasures
of the panchvishays become attached? Therefore, having listened to
these two types of gnãn, one should apply them within one’s mind
with great fervour. For example, a brave and fierce man would be
extremely angered if an adversary killed his father. If the adversary
harassed him further by also killing his son and brother, kidnapping
his wife, passing on his mother to a Muslim, as well as stealing all
his belongings, the man would become increasingly aggravated as he
is harassed more and more. At all times then – while awake as well
as in his dreams – he would be obsessed by only this. In the same
way, only when a person is constantly obsessed by these two topics
can that gnãn be realised. Then, that gnãn would assist him against
any sort of adversity that may befall him. For example, when
Hanumãnji brought the vishalyakarani herbal medicine for
Rãmchandra and gave it to him to drink, all of the arrows from
Rãmchandraji’s body fell out by themselves. Similarly, all of the
‘arrows’ in the form of the indriyas’ desires to indulge in the vishays
are removed when these two points have been imbedded in a person’s
The Vachanãmrut

633

mind. That is to say, the vruttis of his indriyas withdraw from the
pleasures of the vishays and become rooted only in God. Only he is a
satsangi, because only he who associates with his own satya ãtmã
and satya God can be called a satsangi.
13

“If a godly person were to hear the talks of these two points, they
would stir his heart and pervade every pore of his body. Conversely,
if a demonic person were to hear them, they would not touch his
heart at all; instead, they would exit from his ears, just as khir would
not remain in a dog’s stomach because the dog would vomit it out. In
actual fact, nothing can be said to be as delicious as khir, yet it does
not remain in a dog’s stomach, let alone pervade its body. On the
other hand, if a man were to eat khir, it would indeed pervade every
pore of his body, and it would be extremely enjoyable. Likewise,
these talks do not enter into the hearts of dog-like, demonic people;
rather, these talks enter and pervade totally only in the hearts of
godly people.”

14

Shriji Mahãrãj then added, “Only God is like God. Many have
attained qualities similar to His by worshipping Him, yet they
certainly do not become like God. If they did become like God, this
would suggest the existence of several Gods. As a result, the
governance of the world would not remain orderly. One God would
say, ‘I will create the world,’ while another God would say, ‘I will
destroy the world.’ One God would say, ‘I will make it rain,’ while
another would say, ‘I will not.’ One would say, ‘I will instil human
instincts in animals,’ while another would say, ‘I will instil animal
instincts in humans.’ A stable state would not be possible in this
situation. But see how orderly everything functions in the world!
There is not even the slightest irregularity. Thus, the governor of all
activities and the lord of all is one God. Not only that, it seems that
no one can ever challenge Him. Therefore, God is definitely one, and
no one can become like Him.

15

“All these facts that I have revealed may be simple, but
everything is included therein. However, only the wise can grasp
their essence, but not others. Whosoever understands these facts and
thoroughly consolidates them has accomplished everything; indeed,
he has nothing more to achieve. Having listened to these discourses
delivered by Me, one should keep the company of those devotees of
God who have thoroughly imbibed them. This will lead to the day-byday consolidation of those discourses.”
The Vachanãmrut

634

16

In conclusion, Shriji Mahãrãj revealed, “I deliver these
discourses to you not from any imagination of My mind, nor to
display any sort of aptitude. I have experienced all that I have
spoken about. In fact, I speak in accordance to what I practise.
Outwardly, I may have a great deal of contact with women, wealth
and the panchvishays. In fact, wherever I go – Surat, Amdãvãd,
Vadodarã, Vartãl, etc. – thousands of people gather; they obey Me,
honour Me and welcome Me with great fanfare. There I stay in
luxurious places and receive rich clothes, vehicles, etc. Despite all of
this, whenever I look towards My ãtmã and towards the greatness of
God, it all seems absolutely insignificant. I cannot become attached
to any of it. In fact, I become oblivious to it all, just as one is
oblivious to one’s past lives. The reason I can behave in such a
manner is that I have thoroughly realised the aforementioned two
topics.
In fact, whosoever realises them would also behave
accordingly if ever he were somehow put in similar circumstances.
Therefore, these two topics should be understood by all means.”

The Vachanãmrut

635

17

In this way, Shriji Mahãrãj, out of great compassion, addressed
others on the basis of His own behaviour. He, however, is Shri
Purushottam Nãrãyan.
|| Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III-39 || 262 ||

|| End of Gadhadã III Section ||

The Vachanãmrut

636

The Vachanãmrut

637

ADDITIONAL VACHANÃMRUTS
(Included in versions of the Amdãvãd diocese)
Amdãvãd-4
1

On Fãgun vadi 3, Samvat 1882 [26 March 1829], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a cushion with a cylindrical
pillow placed on a decorated cot upon a square platform facing the
mandir of Shri Narnãrãyan in Amdãvãd. He was dressed entirely in
white clothes. A pink pãgh had been tied around His head, and
tassels of roses were dangling from that pãgh. Bunches of roses had
also been placed upon His ears. In addition to this, several garlands
of roses were hanging around His neck, and armlets of roses had
been tied around both arms. At that time, an assembly of munis as
well as devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Shriji Mahãrãj said to the muni-mandal and the
devotees, “Everyone please listen to what I have to say. One should
first develop a firm conviction of the form of God. What is God like?
Well, He, by His own wish, takes birth for the liberation of the jivas.
Yet having taken birth, He is still beyond birth. Despite having to
die, God is still beyond aging and death. He is also ‘niranjan’, that is
to say, He has no blemish of mãyã. In addition, He possesses a
definite form and is self-radiant; He is Parabrahma, antaryãmi, the
supporter of countless millions of brahmãnds; and He also transcends
Akshar. His assuming and discarding of a human body is merely an
illusion – like the magic of a wizard. Furthermore, He is the
controller of the countless muktas, including Akshar. He is also the
lord of all. That Shri Purushottam Nãrãyan, after first taking birth
from Dharmadev and Murti, performs austerities in Badrikãshram
in the form of Narnãrãyan.

3

“That same Shri Narnãrãyan assumes the forms of Matsya,
Kurma, Varãh, Vãman, Rãm, Krishna, etc., on earth for the
fulfillment of particular tasks. There, using his own body, he helps
other people eradicate their belief of being the body and accept the
belief of being the form of Brahma. In this way, he makes his body
and the bodies of other people appear to be the same. Just as, for
The Vachanãmrut

638

example, after a thorn is used to remove another thorn, both thorns
are discarded, similarly, God also discards His body like other jivas
discard theirs. This phenomenon is explained in the Mahãbhãrat
through the story of Nrusinhji. When he wished to leave his body,
Nrusinhji, through his antaryãmi powers, inspired Shiv within his
heart to take the form of a sharabh. Then both Nrusinhji and the
sharabh fought a battle in which Nrusinhji died.
Thus God
independently, by His own wish, accepts a human body and abandons
that human body.
4

“After hearing the incidents of Rushabhdev being burnt in a
forest fire, and Shri Krishna Bhagwãn being killed by an arrow
striking his foot, the minds of those with a nãstik perspective, and
those who are not devotees of God become confused. They then allege
that God too passes through birth and death just like themselves,
and that He receives a human body according to His karmas and
leaves the human body by His karmas as well. They also assert that
only when God performs karmas that do not cause attachment will
He be acquitted of His karmas and attain liberation.

5

“On the other hand, those who have an ãstik mind, and those
who are devotees of God realise the understanding of the nãstiks to be
wrong. They know the body of God to be eternal; and that the birth,
childhood, youth, old age and death of God, as well as whatever other
bodily traits He may display, are merely an illusion. This is because
kãl and mãyã are not powerful enough to have any sort of influence
on God’s body. In fact, all transformations that do appear to occur in
God’s body are all due to His yogic powers. Those who are devotees of
God do not become misled by this; whereas the minds of those who
are not devotees become bewildered, just like worldly people become
bewildered on seeing a wizard’s acts. Those, however, who are aware
of the wizard’s techniques are not bewildered.
Similarly,
Purushottam Shri Narnãrãyan also assumes many different bodies
and discards them like the wizard. Thus, this Shri Narnãrãyan is
the cause of all avatãrs.

6

“Those who infer death upon Shri Narnãrãyan will themselves
have to undergo countless births. The suffering of passing through
the cycle of 8.4 million different life forms3 and the torments of
Yampuri are indeed endless. Conversely, those who realise Shri
Narnãrãyan to be beyond aging and death will be released from their
karmas and the consequent cycle of births and deaths in the 8.4
The Vachanãmrut

639

million life forms. Therefore, all satsangis and sãdhus of our Uddhav
Sampradãy should not infer death upon the forms of God – those that
have occurred in the past, the current one or those that will occur in
the future. This principle should be noted by all.”
7

So saying, Shriji Mahãrãj revealed Himself as the incarnate
form of God. All who heard this discourse affirmed their faith in
Shriji Mahãrãj in this same manner.
|| Vachanãmrut Amdãvãd-4 || 1 ||

Amdãvãd-5
1

On Fãgun vadi 4, Samvat 1882 [27 March 1829], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a cushion with a cylindrical
pillow placed on a large, decorated cot on top of a square platform
north of the mandir of Shri Narnãrãyan in Amdãvãd. He was
dressed entirely in white clothes. Around His neck was a large
garland of roses, and tassels of flowers were hanging from His pãgh.
With His right hand, He was turning a rosary made from tulsi
beads. At that time, an assembly of senior munis as well as devotees
from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Chhadidãr Kubersinhji asked Shriji Mahãrãj,
“Mahãrãj, what is the most extraordinary characteristic of Shri
Purushottam Nãrãyan?”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “No one except Shri Purushottam
Nãrãyan can control the nãdis and prãns of innumerable beings and
grant them instant samãdhi.
Nor can anyone else influence
hundreds of thousands of people by having them abide by niyams.
Nor does anyone else have the power to control Akshar and the
muktas. These are the extraordinary characteristics of Purushottam
Nãrãyan.”

4

Thereafter, Kubersinhji asked a second question: “Mahãrãj,
there are countless millions of brahmãnds. In this brahmãnd, the
avatãr of God is present in Bharat-khand, in Jambu-dwip. But
please explain how God redeems the countless beings of the other
brahmãnds.”

5

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “The very God that resides in this
brahmãnd is also the lord of all. It is He Himself who, for the sake of
the liberation of countless beings, assumes a body in each brahmãnd.
The Vachanãmrut

640

Innumerable beings seek His refuge and consequently attain the holy
feet of Shri Purushottam Nãrãyan in Akshardhãm. That is the
answer to your question.”
6

Kubersinh then asked again, “Mahãrãj, please identify what
satsangis who know God should renounce and what they should
accept.”

7

Shriji Mahãrãj answered, “They should in all ways renounce
desires for worldly objects; instead, they should develop desires
related to God. If they do have desires for wealth, they should reason
instead, ‘If we worship God, we will attain gold coins, diamonds,
rubies, jewels and other invaluable things in the abode of God’ – but
in no way should they harbour desires for worldly objects. If they
have lustful desires, they should think, ‘If we look lustfully towards
another woman, we will have to pass through the cycle of 8.4 million
life forms3 and suffer extensively. Besides, even dogs and donkeys
indulge in this, whereas I have attained the incarnate form of
Purushottam. It will be a great loss for me if He is displeased.’
Reasoning in this manner, they should renounce such lustful desires
and should desire happiness that is related to God. If they have
affection for the relatives of the body, they should abandon it.
Instead, they should form affection towards the Sant, the servant of
God. They should accept this much.

8

“On the other hand, satsangis should renounce the sense of Iness towards the body and develop an attitude of servitude towards
God. If God or the Sant have become displeased in any way or have
held one in contempt, then one should discard all ill feelings that one
may have developed towards God or the Sant. Moreover, one should
realise one’s own mistake and accept the virtue of God and the Sant.
In this way, one should always think positively, but never think
negatively. That is the answer to your question.”

9

Thereafter Kubersinh asked another question: “Mahãrãj, please
explain the nature of dharma, arth, kãm and liberation.”

10

Shriji Mahãrãj smiled gently and said, “The nature of arth is to
accumulate wealth or to fulfill one’s aim of liberation. That is the
nature of arth. The nature of dharma is to use that wealth in
Satsang for the purpose of dharma but not squander it for other
purposes. That is the nature of dharma. The nature of kãm is to
have only one wife, to have intercourse with her only at the
appropriate time and to renounce all other women in the world by
The Vachanãmrut

641

regarding them as one’s mother or sister or daughter. That is the
nature of kãm. Finally, the nature of liberation is to diligently
observe all of the vows of Satsang and keep unfaltering faith in God.
That is the nature of liberation. That is the answer to your
question.” So saying, Shriji Mahãrãj retired to sleep.
|| Vachanãmrut Amdãvãd-5 || 2 ||

Amdãvãd-6
1

On Fãgun vadi 6, Samvat 1882 [29 March 1829], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a cushion with a cylindrical
pillow that had been placed on a decorated cot on top of a square
platform facing the mandir of Shri Narnãrãyan in Amdãvãd. He
was dressed entirely in white clothes. Garlands of roses were placed
around His neck, and tassels of chameli flowers were dangling from
both sides of His pãgh. Bunches of roses were also placed upon both
of His ears. In addition to this, Shriji Mahãrãj had taken a large
bunch of roses in His hand and was gently rubbing it along His face.
At that time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees from various
places had gathered before Him.

2

Then, after the evening ãrti, Kubersinh asked Shriji Mahãrãj a
question: “Mahãrãj, please reveal how the conviction of God that a
person has firmly established in his heart would never falter.”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj first commented, “Everyone should hear the
answer to this question, so please listen attentively.” He then said in
reply, “If one knows the greatness of the manifest form of God, then
one’s conviction never falters. I shall now explain that greatness.

4

“All of the avatãrs of God manifest from the very God that is
present in this Satsang fellowship. That is to say, He is the cause of
all of the avatãrs and is the antaryãmi of all. It is He who, in
Akshardhãm, is radiant, full of countless powers and eternally has a
form. He is also the Lord of all of the lords of the countless
brahmãnds; He is even the cause of Aksharbrahma. When that God
manifests and adopts the behaviour of Rushabhdev, He is known as
Rushabhdev; when He accepts the divine ways of the avatãr of Rãm,
He is known as Rãmchandra; and when He performs the divine
actions of Shri Krishna, He is known as Shri Krishna. In this way,
whichever behaviour of the avatãrs can be seen in God, it should be
The Vachanãmrut

642

understood that all of the previous avatãrs of God have manifested
from Him, and that He is the ultimate cause of them all. If one
understands this, one’s conviction never falters. But if one does not
understand this, one’s conviction may falter somewhat. That is the
answer to your question.”
5

Shriji Mahãrãj then added, “Furthermore, that same Shri
Krishna Bhagwãn took birth as Shri Narnãrãyan from Dharma and
Bhakti. Therefore, realising this Shri Narnãrãyan to be My form, I
have insistingly installed his murti for the first time here in
Shrinagar. Therefore, no one should perceive even the slightest
difference between Shri Narnãrãyan and Myself. It is He who is the
dweller of Brahmadhãm.”

6

Hearing Shriji Mahãrãj say this, Kubersinh asked further,
“Mahãrãj, what is that Brahmapur like? Please describe it and the
devotees of God that reside there.”

7

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “It is aksharrup Brahma which has
become the abode for Shri Purushottam Nãrãyan to dwell in. That
Aksharbrahma in the form of the abode of God is eternal in
comparison to all the other aksharbrahmasi .
Within that
Brahmadhãm, there are several types of palaces. Each palace has
various types of decorative balconies and terraces. There are also
many different types of fountains and many different types of
gardens. The gardens contain innumerable flowers of innumerable
species, each one radiant. It is so beautiful that it cannot be
compared to any other abode. It is also called Golok. In addition, its
splendour is countless times more than the divine riches of countless
other abodes.

8

“That abode is also limitless. Just as there is no limit to ãkãsh,
regardless of the direction in which one looks, similarly, there is no
limit to Brahmadhãm.
Whether above, below or in the four
directions, there is no boundary to the abode of God. This is because
it is boundless. If one were to try to reach its end one would realise
that it is endless. Such is the vastness of Brahmapur.

i Here, ‘other aksharbrahmas’ should be understood to mean ‘muktas who have

become like Aksharbrahma’.

The Vachanãmrut

643

9

“Also, the objects within Brahmapur are all divine and composed
of chaitanya. Countless attendants, who are also radiant and have a
divine form, reside in that abode. There, they are forever eager for
the service of God, the antaryãmi of all life forms. It is the same
master of that abode – the lord of Akshar and the muktas,
Parabrahma Purushottam – who is present here in this Satsang.
Only one who has such faith attains Brahmadhãm.”
|| Vachanãmrut Amdãvãd-6 || 3 ||

Amdãvãd-7
1

On Fãgun vadi 7, Samvat 1882 [30 March 1829], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was having the Vãsudev Mãhãtmya read on
the medi above the gate of the mandir of Shri Narnãrãyan in
Amdãvãd. Thereafter, in the evening, He got up and sat facing east
on a large, decorated cot under the neem tree near the gate. Around
His head He had tied a pink pãgh, in which tassels of roses had been
inserted. He was also lavishly adorned with garlands of roses. In
addition to this, He had covered Himself with a white blanket and
was wearing a white survãl. At that time, an assembly of munis as
well as devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Thereupon Prãgji Dave asked Shriji Mahãrãj, “Mahãrãj, by
what means can one’s mind become firmly fixed on You so that it
does not become adulterous by straying elsewhere?”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj began by saying, “Please listen as I answer your
question.” He then continued, “By realising the greatness of God,
one’s mind becomes fixed on Him. Now I shall explain how that
greatness should be understood.

4

“I had previously asked Rãmãnand Swãmi at Lãdhã Brãhmin’s
house in Piplãnã, ‘Are you truly God, or are you merely called God?’
Rãmãnand Swãmi did not reply then. Later in Samvat 1869, I had
fallen ill. During My illness, I went to Kshir-sãgar where Sheshshãyi Nãrãyan rests upon Shesh and saw Rãmãnand Swãmi there.
He was wearing a white dhotiyu and had covered himself with a
white cloth. I also saw many others sitting near the holy feet of
Shesh-shãyi Nãrãyan.
There, I asked Nãrãyan, ‘Who is this
Rãmãnand Swãmi?’ Nãrãyan replied, ‘He is a knower of Brahma.’

The Vachanãmrut

644

After he said this, Rãmãnand Swãmi merged into the body of
Nãrãyan, and I then returned to My physical body.
5

“Then, when I looked within, I saw the source of the divine
sound of pranav. While I was looking at it, Nandishwar, the bull,
approached Me. I mounted upon it and went to Shiv in Kailãs.
There, Garud arrived. So I mounted upon it and began to travel to
Vaikunth and Brahmadhãm. But as Garud was unable to fly to
Brahmadhãm, I went alone to the abode of Shri Purushottam
Nãrãyan, which transcends everything. There, I saw that it was I
who was Purushottam; I did not see anyone eminent apart from
Myself. In this manner, I travelled to these places and finally
returned to My body.

6

“Then, when I looked within again, I realised that I am the
creator, sustainer and destroyer of all of the brahmãnds. In those
countless brahmãnds, it is by My divine light that countless Shivs,
countless Brahmãs, countless Kailãses, countless Vaikunths, Golok,
Brahmapur, as well as countless millions of other realms are radiant.

7

“What am I like? Well, if I were to shake the earth with the toe
of My foot, the worlds of countless brahmãnds would begin to shake.
It is also by My light that the sun, the moon, the stars, etc., are
radiant. So, if one develops the conviction of My form in this
manner, one’s mind becomes fixed on Me – God – and would never
stray anywhere else. Moreover, I will grant My supreme abode to all
who come to My refuge and understand this. In addition, I will make
them virtually antaryãmi, and powerful enough to create, sustain
and destroy brahmãnds. However, after receiving such powers, one
should not become egotistical and think, ‘I alone am great,’ and
neglect the manifest rishi-form of Shri Narnãrãyan. Instead, one
should realise, ‘It is by the compassion of Shri Narnãrãyan that I
have attained such greatness.’” Thus, Shriji Mahãrãj concluded the
question-answer dialogue.
|| Vachanãmrut Amdãvãd-7 || 4 ||

Amdãvãd-8
1

On Fãgun vadi 8, Samvat 1882 [31 March 1829], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was serving food to the sãdhus in their
residential hall, north of the mandir of Shri Narnãrãyan in
The Vachanãmrut

645

Amdãvãd. He had tied a beautiful, white pãgh around His head and
was wearing a white khes. He had also placed a khes over His left
shoulder and had tied one of its ends around His waist. A large
garland of roses adorned His neck as well.
2

While serving lãdus to the sãdhus, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “A
sãdhu should renounce anger in all respects. What is anger like?
Well, it destroys all virtuous qualities such as gnãn, the performance
of austerities, the chanting of the name of God, etc.

3

“Now I shall identify the motives from which anger arises.
Anger arises when sãdhus are engaged in a question-answer session
amongst themselves, or if there is an argumentative discussion. It
can also arise from the giving and taking of particular objects, or
when reprimanding someone, or when someone tries to maintain
partiality towards one’s attendant sãdhu. Also, anger can arise when
one is insulted, out of jealousy, over where to sit or not to sit, or even
because of the unequal distribution of God’s prasãd. In this way,
there are many reasons for anger to arise.

4

“If a senior sãdhu or a junior sãdhu becomes angry, he should
first prostrate to whomever he has expressed his anger upon, and
then please that person by speaking pleasant words to him in a
pleading, meek and sincere tone. This is My command.

5

“If anyone else, due to a malignant intellect, harbours an
offensive thought towards a sãdhu, he should confess and himself
voice his offensive thought by saying, ‘Mahãrãj, I have harboured an
offensive thought regarding you.’ Then, in order to atone for that
thought, he should fold his hands and pray for forgiveness.

6

“If a sãdhu becomes angry on a householder devotee, then he
should verbally pray and bow down to him from a seated posture; but
he should not prostrate before him. If sãnkhya-yogi women become
angry amongst themselves or on karma-yogi women, they too should
pray verbally and bow down from a seated position. Sãnkhya-yogi
men, on the other hand, should do as the sãdhus do if they become
angry upon anyone.

7

“In general, whenever we become angry on someone, we should
realise that person to be a devotee of our master, Shri Narnãrãyan,
and instantly forsake our arrogance, bow down to him and pray.
However, one should never maintain a superficial perspective by
believing, ‘I am senior and better than him; whereas he is not senior
The Vachanãmrut

646

but a mere junior.’ One should not entertain such a feeling. In fact,
even our Ishtadev, Shri Narnãrãyan, does not keep any arrogance or
anger; so as his followers and the members of this Uddhav
Sampradãy, we should renounce all forms of anger and arrogance.
8

“Shri Narnãrãyan will be greatly pleased upon anyone who
performs the atonement that I have prescribed for becoming angry.
As a result, that person’s antahkaran will be purified, and all of his
vicious natures such as lust, anger, egotism, avarice, arrogance and
matsar will be destroyed. Conversely, he who does not perform
atonement for becoming angry should be thought of as a snake, not
as a devotee of God.”

9

Shriji Mahãrãj thus delivered this discourse. The sãdhus as
well as all the male and female devotees who heard this discourse
were extremely overjoyed.
|| Vachanãmrut Amdãvãd-8 || 5 ||

Ashlãli
1

On Chaitra sudi 2, Samvat 1882 [9 April 1829], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj left Amdãvãd with great pomp and festivity
and reached Ashlãli in the evening. There, He was accommodated in
a mango grove north of the village and was seated on a dais. He was
dressed entirely in white clothes. Also, He was wearing beautiful
garlands of flowers around His neck, and tassels of flowers were
hanging from His pãgh. At that time, an assembly of munis as well
as devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Shriji Mahãrãj then said to Muktãnand Swãmi, Brahmãnand
Swãmi and all of the other sãdhus, “Please listen, I wish to say
something. Whoever incompletely realises the nature of God suffers
a great loss. That is, that person cannot experience the true bliss of
Purushottam Bhagwãn – who we also call Shri Krishna, Shri
Vãsudev, Shri Narnãrãyan, Parabrahma and Shri Nãrãyan – nor
can he become an ekãntik bhakta. Thus, one should consolidate one’s
gnãn by profoundly associating with an Ekãntik Bhakta of God who
has such gnãn. This is because, without the true gnãn of God, even
the prajãpatis and other creators of the cosmos have to repeatedly
take birth along with the creation and then ultimately merge back
into mãyã. But they do not attain Akshardhãm, the abode of Shri
The Vachanãmrut

647

Purushottam Bhagwãn.
understanding.”

The reason for this is a flaw in their

3

Thereupon all of the munis asked, “Mahãrãj, please explain this
flaw in their understanding.”

4

Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Very well. Please listen as I explain their
flaws. First of all, they consider the strength of their own actions but
not the strength of one’s refuge in God to be instrumental in their
liberation. Secondly, they do not realise that becoming aksharrup
and serving Shri Purushottam Nãrãyan is in itself liberation. This
is their second mistake. Their third mistake is that they believe the
innumerable avatãrs of God such as Rãm, Krishna, etc., to be a part
of God. This is a grave mistake on their part. Fourthly, at the time
of a previous death, they had a thought in their minds, ‘How are
these brahmãnds created? It would be good to see for once.’ Seeing
their desire, God engaged them in the creation of the brahmãnds.
Only when they realise true gnãn by profoundly associating with the
Ekãntik Bhakta of God will they become brahmarup and attain the
abode of God, and only then will they become eternally happy.
Therefore, a devotee of God should desire nothing but the service of
God.”

5

Shriji Mahãrãj then explained, “There are three types of
devotees; they can be recognised by their characteristics: He who
worships God with the intention of earning powers to create the world
is known as ‘aishvaryãrthi’. He is the lowest type of devotee. He
who worships God only to experience the ãtmã is known as a
‘kaivalyãrthi’. He is of an intermediate level. However, he who has
a constant and singular resolve for the service of the manifest form of
Purushottam Bhagwãn is known as a ‘bhagwat-nishtãrthi’. He is
the best devotee of all. Because all of us have the conviction of the
incarnate form of Shri Narnãrãyan, we are all undoubtedly the best.”

6

All who had gathered in the assembly were overjoyed hearing
these words of Shriji Mahãrãj.
|| Vachanãmrut Ashlãli || 6 ||

Jetalpur-1
1

About an hour-and-a-half after sunrise on Chaitra sudi 3,
Samvat 1882 [10 April 1829], Swãmi Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was
The Vachanãmrut

648

sitting on a large, decorated cot that had been placed under an
ãsopãlav tree in the mansion in Jetalpur. He was dressed entirely in
white clothes. Around His neck He was wearing several garlands of
guldãvadi flowers, tassels of dolariyã flowers were dangling from His
pãgh, and two karnikãr flowers had been placed upon both of His
ears. Also, He was playing with a beautiful lemon in His hands. At
that time, an assembly of sãdhus as well as satsangi men and
women from various places had gathered before Him.
2

Then addressing the entire assembly, Shriji Mahãrãj asked,
“Everyone in this world accepts some doctrine or other. Basically,
though, there are two major doctrines: One is the Dvait doctrine and
the other is the doctrine of Advait. Please explain which doctrine a
spiritual aspirant should accept.”

3

Thereupon Purushottam Bhatt said in reply, “Mahãrãj, in the
Advait doctrine, by believing their ãtmã to be God, people behave as
they please. Consequently, they fall from the path of liberation.
Thus, an aspirant should accept the Dvait doctrine.”

4

Shriji Mahãrãj then raised a doubt. He questioned, “According
to the Dvait doctrine, jiva, ishwar and mãyã are satya. But as long
as mãyã persists, how can the jiva attain liberation?”

5

Purushottam Bhatt replied, “By performing pure karmas one
attains liberation.”

6

Again Shriji Mahãrãj raised a doubt: “The two types of karmas,
namely nivrutti and pravrutti, become assimilated in mãyã in the
form of deep sleep. What is that state of deep sleep like? Well, just
as no one is capable of conquering Mount Lokãlok, similarly, no jiva
is capable of conquering that deep sleep. Above that still is mãyã in
its state of equilibrium, which is extremely immense. No jiva can
conquer it. Thus, the means to transcend mãyã is as follows: When
the jiva comes into contact with the manifest form of Shri
Purushottam Bhagwãn – who is beyond mãyã and who is the
destroyer of mãyã and all karmas – or the Sant who has attained
that God, then by accepting their refuge, the jiva can transcend
mãyã.”

7

After delivering this discourse, Shriji Mahãrãj went up into the
mansion to His meals. After dinner, He returned and sat on a large,
decorated cot under the ãsopãlav tree. Then, looking lovingly at all of
the sãdhus and devotees, He said, “In the beginning, when no one
The Vachanãmrut

649

honours a person, imagine what his nature is like. Then, when 100
people begin to follow him, his self-conceit becomes of a different type.
Further, when 1,000 people or 100,000 people follow him, or 10
million people follow him, his self-conceit becomes of a different type
altogether. Then, if he becomes like Brahmã, or Shiv, or Indra, and
if he is rational, he would realise, ‘My greatness is not due to this
status.’ What is it due to? Well, greatness is due to the ãtmã; and
secondly, it is due to association with the Sant. This is because even
though Brahmã and the others are all great, they still crave for the
dust from the feet of the Sant.
8

“So then, wherein lies the greatness of the Sant? Allow Me to
explain. The greatness of the Sant is not due to wealth or objects or
any kingdom; rather, his greatness is due to his bhakti and upãsanã
of God. Secondly, the Sant has ãtmã-realisation. It is due to these
virtues that he is great.

9

“If one cannot realise this, then one should develop a conviction
within one’s ãtmã that one should be profoundly attached to the Sant
who has attained the incarnate form of God, and one should believe
only that Sant to be one’s own self. One may doubt, though, ‘How,
then, is the master-servant relationship maintained?’ Well, take the
example of King Gãlav. He wanted to perform a sacrifice for which
he specifically required black-eared horses. It so happened that those
black-eared horses were at the home of Varun. But since that region
was beyond his reach, he called upon Garud. Then, having mounted
Garud, he went there and brought back the horses. So does this
mean that King Gãlav’s servitude towards Garud diminished? No, it
did not diminish. Similarly, the purpose of being profoundly attached
to the Sant, who is a knower of Brahma, is that he has the ability of
penetrating the barriers. That is the reason for being profoundly
attached to such a Sant.”

10

Shriji Mahãrãj then added that all should imbibe this principle,
as it is the very life of everyone.
|| Vachanãmrut Jetalpur-1 || 7 ||

Jetalpur-2
1

In the evening of Chaitra sudi 4, Samvat 1882 [11 April 1829],
Swãmi Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large, decorated
The Vachanãmrut

650

cot that had been placed in the middle of the courtyard of the mandir
of Shri Baldevji in Jetalpur. He was dressed entirely in white
clothes, and tassels of dolariyã flowers decorated His pãgh. In
addition to this, He had a handkerchief in His left hand and was
turning a rosary made of tulsi beads with His right hand. At that
time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees from various places
had gathered before Him.
2

Thereupon Brahmãnand Swãmi bowed before Shriji Mahãrãj
and asked, “Mahãrãj, please reveal who can be called a ‘yati’?”

3

Shriji Mahãrãj said, “One who firmly observes brahmacharya
and has conquered all of his indriyas should be known as a ‘yati’; i.e.,
one who is like Hanumãnji and Lakshmanji should be known as a
‘yati’. When, on Rãmchandraji’s instruction, Hanumãnji went to
Lankã in search of Sitãji, in order to recognise Sitãji he looked at the
faces of all of the women in Lankã. As he continued looking, he
thought, ‘This is not Jãnkiji… This one is not Jãnkiji…’ Then, while
he was thinking this, he saw Mandodari and thought, ‘Could this be
Jãnkiji?’ But then he concluded in his mind that because of her
separation from Rãmchandraji, Jãnkiji’s body would never be so
healthy, and she would never be able to sleep so soundly. With this
thought in mind, Hanumãnji turned back. Then he doubted in his
mind, ‘I am a ‘yati’, but could a flaw have developed in me by seeing
all these women?’ But then he reconciled to himself, ‘How can there
be any flaw in me? It is because of Rãmchandraji’s instruction to
find Sitãji that I had to look at all of these women.’ He also thought,
“By Rãmchandraji’s grace, no disturbance has arisen in my indriyas
and in my vrutti.’ Thinking this, he wandered unreservedly to look
for Sitãji. In this way, like Hanumãnji, one whose antahkaran
remains pure despite being faced by such vicious influences is called
a ‘yati’.

4

“Moreover, while searching for Sitãji in the forest after she was
abducted, Rãmchandraji and Lakshmanji came to the place where
Sugriv was seated on the Fatak Shilã. There, they informed Sugriv,
‘We have come here because Jãnkiji has been abducted. So if you
know of her whereabouts, please tell us.’ Sugriv replied, ‘Mahãrãj, I
did hear the cries, ‘O Rãm! O Rãm!’ coming from the sky. Also,
some pieces of jewellery, which are tied in this piece of cloth, were
dropped from above. I have kept them with me.’ Thereupon
Raghunãthji requested, ‘Please bring them here so that we can check
The Vachanãmrut

651

them.’
Sugriv thus brought the jewellery to Raghunãthji.
Raghunãthji took the pieces of jewellery and showed them to
Lakshmanji. First he showed ornaments worn on the ears, then he
showed bracelets and other ornaments worn on the arms, but
Lakshmanji did not recognise any of these. He was then shown some
anklets. Lakshmanji immediately exclaimed, ‘Mahãrãj! These are
Jãnkiji’s anklets!’ Hearing this, Raghunãthji inquired, ‘Lakshmanji,
how is it that you did not recognise the other ornaments and
recognised these anklets?’ Lakshmanji replied, ‘Mahãrãj, I have
never seen Jãnkiji’s body. In fact, except for her feet, I have not seen
any other part of Sitãji’s body. The only reason I have been able to
recognise the anklets is because whenever I used to go and bow at her
feet every evening, I would see her anklets.’ In this way, despite the
fact that for 14 years Lakshmanji was in their service, with the
exception of Jãnkiji’s feet, he had never intentionally seen her body.
Such a person should be known as a ‘yati’.”
5

Having said this, Shriji Mahãrãj
Brahmãnand Swãmi is also like that.”

6

In this manner, as the assembly was listening, Shriji Mahãrãj
greatly praised Brahmãnand Swãmi as being a ‘yati’.

7

Thereafter, Shriji Mahãrãj went to the outskirts of the village.
There, He sat on a large, decorated cot that had been placed on top of
a low, broad platform at the site where the sacrifices had been
performed. At that time, an assembly of munis as well as devotees
from various places had gathered before Him.

8

Then Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Please begin a question-answer
session.”

9

Thereupon Ãshjibhãi Patel asked, “Mahãrãj, what is the nature
of the jiva? Please reveal it to me as it is.”

10

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “The jiva is uncuttable, unpierceable,
immortal, chaitanya, and the size of an anu. You may also ask,
‘Where does the jiva reside?’ Well, it resides in the hrudayãkãsh,
and while staying there it performs different functions. From there,
when it wants to see, it does so through the eyes; when it wants to
hear sounds, it does so through the ears; it smells all types of smells
through the nose; it tastes through the tongue; and through the skin,
it experiences the pleasures of all sensations. In addition, it thinks
through the man, contemplates through the chitt and makes
The Vachanãmrut

commented,

“This

652

convictions through the buddhi. In this manner, through the ten
indriyas and the four antahkarans, it indulges in all of the vishays.
It pervades the entire body from head to toe, yet is distinct from it.
Such is the nature of the jiva. It is due to the grace of the incarnate
form of Purushottam, Shri Narnãrãyan, that a devotee is able to see
the jiva as it actually is. Others, on the other hand, cannot even
begin to realise the nature of the jiva.”
11

Having answered the question in this manner and thereby
pleasing everyone, Shriji Mahãrãj bid ‘Jai Sachchidãnand’ to the
assembly and retired to the mansion to sleep.
|| Vachanãmrut Jetalpur-2 || 8 ||

Jetalpur-3
1

In the early morning of Chaitra sudi 5, Samvat 1882 [12 April
1829], Swãmi Shri Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj arrived in the garden on
the western side of the mansion, the place of His residence, in
Jetalpur. Under a large borsali tree within the garden, He was
sitting facing east on a cushion with a cylindrical pillow placed on a
decorated cot on a square platform. He was dressed entirely in white
clothes. He was also wearing garlands of champã, borsali and
guldãvadi flowers around His neck, and tassels of chameli and
dolariyã flowers were hanging from His pãgh. Bunches of hajãri
flowers had been placed upon His ears. In addition to this, He was
playing with a pomegranate and a lemon with both hands. At that
time, Muktãnand Swãmi, Brahmãnand Swãmi, and other munis as
well as devotees from various places had gathered before Him in an
assembly.

2

Shriji Mahãrãj first thought for a while, and then said,
“Everyone please listen; I wish to speak to you. For devotees of God,
there is nothing worse than harbouring impure desires. This is
because devotees who have such impure desires, even if they stay
near Me, cannot be happy. In fact, before engaging in the worship of
God, they asked, ‘Mahãrãj, please keep us near You.’ However,
because they did not eradicate their impure desires, they are
miserable.”

3

Thereupon Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, how are those
impure desires eradicated?”
The Vachanãmrut

653

4

Shriji Mahãrãj explained, “The method for eradicating impure
desires is as follows: Firstly, whenever one entertains a thought
which infringes the codes of dharma that have been laid down by Me,
or whenever one thinks ill of a sãdhu or a householder, one should
repeatedly chant ‘Narnãrãyan, Swãminãrãyan’ aloud. Secondly, one
should offer to God the nine types of bhakti coupled with knowledge of
His greatness and the observance of dharma. As a result, God
resides in one’s heart and destroys the impure desires. In fact, just
as God freed the elephant from the crocodile’s mouth, in the same
way, this method that I have just revealed to you will eradicate your
impure desires.

5

“Now I shall now tell you another method which will benefit all
of you, so please listen. One should never intentionally infringe the
codes of dharma related to one’s five religious vows4. If one does so
unknowingly, one should immediately atone for the infringement.

6

“In addition, one should realise one’s own self to be the witness;
i.e., ‘I am the ãtmã, which is full of chaitanya; it transcends all
thoughts and reason. This body, which is accompanied by the mind,
is not actually my true form.’

7

“Furthermore, if God smiles at someone, or if God calls someone,
or if He performs any other sort of action, one should never bear an
aversion towards Him.
One should imbibe this form of
understanding. However, someone may feel, ‘I have worshipped
Mahãrãj a lot, and I have also served Him a great deal; still, Mahãrãj
does not talk to me. Instead, he talks to others a lot. So I might as
well worship God while sitting at home.’ In this manner, he bears an
aversion towards God. In that case, I could also believe, ‘What does
this person have to do with Me?’ As a result, that person’s future
would be uncertain. However, I Myself do not look at anyone’s flaws.
In fact, My nature is such that I always look only at people’s virtues.

8

“Now I shall tell you how that devotee should imbibe virtues and
eradicate flaws. If he thinks, ‘What was I like before I came into the
Satsang fellowship? Well, I was the experiencer of kãl, karma, birth,
death, and the cycle of births and deaths. So how can I bear an
aversion towards God who has freed me from all of that, who has
made me fearless, and who has helped me progress by bestowing
noble virtues upon me? How can I ignore His wishes and do as I
please?’ Only when that devotee stops bearing an aversion towards
God by thinking in this manner does he become happy.
The Vachanãmrut

654

9

“In fact, with this body, nothing is greater than to do as God
likes. That in itself is bhakti. In fact, only by doing this does one
attain God. That is why egotism, jealousy, lust, anger, avarice, etc.,
are all obstacles on the path of liberation and should be discarded.

10

“Of those vicious natures, egotism is absolutely the worst of all.
Just look, one who has a minor flaw in any other religious vow still
manages to survive in Satsang, whereas those who had egotism have
never been able to survive. Therefore, O sãdhus! Never allow any
lapse in the observance of non-egotism and other vows. Be extremely
vigilant. Believe your self to be distinct from your body. Offer bhakti
to Shri Purushottam, Shri Narnãrãyan, diligently and scrupulously.
Constantly engage in worship coupled with remembrance of God; its
bliss will equal the bliss of actually having the darshan of God.

11

“Secondly, in our Satsang one who is well-versed in the
scriptures is not necessarily great. Who should be considered great?
Well, he who, through vairãgya, considers all 14 realms to be as
insignificant as a blade of grass; he who, just as he has firm
attachment for his body, has firm conviction of God,
i.e., Purushottam, as He is; and he who is oblivious to the world in
the waking state just as he is oblivious to the world in the state of
deep sleep – such a person is great in our Satsang.”
|| Vachanãmrut Jetalpur-3 || 9 ||

Jetalpur-4
1

On Chaitra sudi 6, Samvat 1882 [13 April 1829], Swãmi Shri
Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting leaning on the cylindrical pillow
on a cushion that had been placed in the south-facing balcony of the
mansion in Jetalpur. He was wearing a white khes with a border of
silver threads. A white pãgh with a veil of flowers adorned His head,
and He had also covered Himself with a blanket of white flowers. In
addition to this, His entire body had been anointed with sandalwood
paste mixed with saffron. Garlands of guldãvadi flowers were placed
around His neck as well. At that time, an assembly of munis as well
as devotees from various places had gathered before Him.

2

Then addressing the entire assembly, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “In
this realm, the jiva attains liberation only by the following means:
The Vachanãmrut

655

faith in the manifest form of God, His darshan and His constant
remembrance. After all, it is said in the Shrimad Bhãgwat that even
those who insulted God, namely Kansa, Shishupãl, Dantvakra, etc.,
attained liberation since all of them had constant remembrance of
God. Thus, liberation is attained by constantly remembering God.
And since all of you possess such remembrance, your liberation is
assured.
3

“Having said that though, you should still observe the codes of
dharma prescribed by Me in all respects for as long as you have
consciousness of your bodies. You may claim, though, ‘If a person
has attained God and constantly remembers Him, why does he need
to observe religious vows?’ Well, in reply to that, consider the
difference between one who firmly observes the vows and one who is
slack in his observance. Allow Me to explain that difference to you.
Even though both remember God, the person who does not observe
niyams can only earn liberation for himself, but he cannot help other
jivas attain liberation. Also, he does not become an ekãntik bhakta,
nor does he attain the nirgun abode of God. Although he does not
have to undergo births and deaths, he cannot stay in the Satsang
fellowship.

4

“All of you, however, are the best type of devotees. In fact,
sãdhus such as yourselves who observe niyams are of a totally
different category. For that reason, whoever feeds you sincerely will
earn the merits of performing millions of sacrifices and will
ultimately attain liberation. Whoever touches your feet will be freed
of their sins committed in millions of past lives. Anyone who kindly
offers you clothes will also attain ultimate liberation. Whichever
rivers and lakes into which you dip your feet become like places of
pilgrimage, and any tree that you have sat under or eaten fruits of
will also definitely benefit. If someone devoutly does your darshan, or
if someone devoutly bows before you, then all of his sins are
destroyed. Moreover, whomever you talk to about God and whomever
you inspire to observe the niyams related to dharma will attain
liberation. In fact, all of the actions of sãdhus like yourselves who
observe niyams are redemptive. This is because you have the firm
refuge of the manifest form of Shri Narnãrãyan Rishi. That Shri
Narnãrãyan Rishi is always present in your assembly. This is the
answer to those two points.

The Vachanãmrut

656

5

“If again you may claim, ‘If we have a firm refuge of God, why do
mãyik gunas still pervade us?’ Then let Me say that it takes Me no
time at all to eradicate the six physical and emotional sensations14
and the mãyik gunas from all of you. In fact, it would take Me no
time to enable all of you to recall your countless previous lives and to
be able to perform the creation and other processes of countless
brahmãnds. Nevertheless, I have kept you like this and have
suppressed your powers because it is My wish to do so, and for the
purpose of enabling you to attain the bliss of the manifest form of
God. What is more, all of you have currently attained Shri
Purushottam who is incarnate in the form of Shri Narnãrãyan Rishi.
Therefore, relinquish all doubts and happily engage in worship.”
Saying this, Shriji Mahãrãj became silent.

6

Thereafter Ãshjibhãi asked Shriji Mahãrãj a question: “Mahãrãj,
how is it that one attains liberation by keeping enmity towards God?
Please do tell us.”

7

Shriji Mahãrãj replied, “Once King Drupad wished to have his
daughter, Draupadi, married. So that she could select a bridegroom,
he arranged a grand function in which he invited all of the kings.
Dronãchãrya also came, as did the Pãndavs. Then all of the kings
took turns to try and pierce the fish, but none were able to do so.
Thereupon Yudhishthir said, ‘I will pierce the fish.’ Having said
this, Yudhishthir took aim. Dronãchãrya asked him, ‘Can you see
this assembly?’ He replied, ‘Yes, I can see it.’ Again Dronãchãrya
asked him, ‘Can you see your body?’ He replied, ‘Yes, I can see it.’
Then Dronãchãrya said, ‘You will not be able to pierce the fish.’ In
this way, four of the brothers were unable to pierce the fish.
Thereafter, Arjun stepped forward. He picked up his bow and took
aim. Dronãchãrya asked him, ‘Can you see this assembly?’ Arjun
replied, ‘No, I cannot see the assembly, and I cannot even see the
fish. Instead, I see only the bird attached to the fish.’ Hearing this,
Dronãchãrya said, ‘Focus on its head.’ Arjun adjusted his aim and
said, ‘Now I do not see even the bird; I see only its head.’ Finally
Dronãchãrya said, ‘Now take your shot.’ Arjun then pierced the
fish’s head. In this manner, if all of one’s vruttis are focused on the
form of God, then one can attain liberation even with a feeling of
enmity towards God.

8

“For example, when the vruttis of Shishupãl, Kansa and others
became completely engrossed in Shri Krishna, they attained
The Vachanãmrut

657

liberation. But if a person does not know how to bear malice towards
God in this manner then he is consigned to narak. Rather than this,
it is much easier to engage in the bhakti of God. Conversely, though,
one who worships God with such a malignant intellect will never
cease to be called demonic and can in no way be called a devotee.
9

“Thus, if one wants to forsake the evil practices of the demons
and join the ranks of Dhruv, Prahlãd, Nãrad, the Sanakãdik, etc.,
engaging in the worship of God by offering bhakti is far better.”

10

Having heard Shriji Mahãrãj speak in this manner, everyone in
the assembly experienced profound bliss.
|| Vachanãmrut Jetalpur-4 || 10 ||

Jetalpur-5
1

Approximately four-and-a-half hours after sunset on Chaitra
sudi 7, Samvat 1882 [14 April 1829], Swãmi Shri Sahajãnandji
Mahãrãj was sitting on a wooden cot facing north in the courtyard
south of the palace in Jetalpur. He was dressed entirely in white
clothes. He was wearing a pãgh made from a thin, white cloth
around His head. He had also covered Himself with a thin, white
cotton cloth and was wearing a white dhotiyu. At that time, an
assembly of munis as well as devotees from various places had
gathered before Him.

2

After thinking for a moment, Shriji Mahãrãj said, “Everyone
please pay attention; today I wish to talk to you about things as they
really are. Specifically, there is nothing greater than worshipping
God. Why? Because everything happens according to the will of God.
In fact, at this moment, even the will of this assembly can be
fulfilled. By the grace of Shri Narnãrãyan, even My will can be
fulfilled; i.e., whatever I wish for is also fulfilled. Allow Me to
elaborate on this.

3

“Whatever I will in My mind is fulfilled in this world. If I will,
‘May he attain a kingdom,’ then he will attain a kingdom. If I will,
‘May he lose his kingdom,’ then his kingdom will be lost. If I will,
‘Let there be this much rainfall here at this moment,’ then it will
definitely rain here; and if I will, ‘Let there be no rainfall here,’ then
it will not rain here. Also if I will, ‘May he attain wealth,’ then he
does so; and if I will, ‘May he not attain wealth,’ then he certainly
The Vachanãmrut

658

does not. If I will, ‘May she bear a son,’ then she mothers a son; and
if I will, ‘May she not have a son,’ then she definitely does not. If I
will, ‘May he contract a disease,’ then he will contract a disease; and
if I will, ‘May he not contract a disease,’ then he will not contract a
disease. So, when I will for something, it actually happens that way.
4

“Then you will argue that a satsangi still has to bear joy and
pain – he contracts diseases, he sometimes loses all of his wealth and
luxuries, and despite working extremely hard all his life, he still
remains poor. Well, the explanation for all of his efforts not yielding
fruits is that it occurs in direct proportion to his slackness in
engaging in the worship of God. God definitely wishes to assist him.
In fact, if His own devotee is to face the pain of a shuli, God will
reduce that pain by having him pricked by a mere thorn instead. As
far as I am concerned, I feel, ‘If a satsangi is to suffer the pain of a
scorpion sting, may I suffer that pain a thousand-fold instead, but a
devotee should be relieved of that pain and remain happy.’ This is
the boon I had requested from Rãmãnand Swãmi. That is why I
pray, ‘May good be bestowed upon all!’

5

“Also, I am always trying to keep the vrutti of people’s minds
fixed on God. Why? Because I know everything about the past, the
present and the future. In fact, while sitting here, I know everything
that happens; even when I was in My mother’s womb, I knew
everything; and even before I came into My mother’s womb, I knew
everything. This is because I am God – Shri Narnãrãyan Rishi.
Even if a person who has committed extremely grave sins comes and
accepts My refuge and abides by the niyams, then in his last
moments, I will grant him My darshan and take him to God’s
Akshardhãm.

6

“Presently, the lord of Akshardhãm, Shri Purushottam, being
born to Dharmadev and Murtidevi – who is also called Bhakti –
manifests in Badrikãshram and performs austerities in the form of
Shri Narnãrãyan Rishi.
It is to denounce the beliefs of the
hypocrites, to destroy any traditions of adharma and nurture the
traditions of dharma, and to propagate bhakti coupled with dharma,
gnãn and vairãgya on this earth in this Kali-yug that Shri
Narnãrãyan Rishi was born to Shri Dharmadev and Bhakti in the
form of Nãrãyanmuni – who is presently sitting in this assembly.”

7

By saying this, Shriji Mahãrãj filled His devotees with joy.
The Vachanãmrut

659

8

Continuing, He said, “The only purpose behind My repeatedly
mentioning the predominance of Shri Narnãrãyandev is that that
same Shri Narnãrãyan, who is Shri Krishna Purushottam and who
resides in Akshardhãm, himself sits daily in this assembly. That is
why I speak of his predominance. So, realising My form, I have
spent hundreds of thousands of rupees on constructing a spired
mandir in Amdãvãd. That is why I first installed the idols of Shri
Narnãrãyan therein. That Shri Narnãrãyan is the lord of countless
brahmãnds. Of these, he is especially the lord of this Bharat-khand.
Those people in Bharat-khand who disregard this manifest form of
Shri Narnãrãyan by worshipping other deities are like adulterous
women who leave their husbands and become attached to other
lovers. Even the Shrimad Bhãgwat mentions that Shri Narnãrãyan
is the lord of this Bharat-khand.

9

“Furthermore, it is for the liberation of the jivas that I have
manifested along with these sãdhus. Therefore, if you abide by My
words, I will take all of you to the abode from which I have come. So
you should also realise, ‘We have already attained liberation.’
Furthermore, if you keep firm faith in Me and do as I say, then even
if you were to suffer extreme hardships, or even if you were to face
the calamities of seven consecutive famines, I will protect you from
them. Even if you were made to suffer miseries from which there
seems to be no way out, I will still protect you – but only if you
meticulously observe the dharma of My Satsang, and only if you
continue practising satsang. However, if you do not, you will suffer
terrible miseries, and I will have nothing to do with you.

10

“This time, I have left no deficiency in any matter whatsoever.
Just look, I have performed several sacrifices in this village of
Jetalpur. I have also been visiting here for so many years; I must
have bathed in this lake along with My sãdhus thousands of times; I
must have visited each home in this village of Jetalpur a hundred
times, and I have also taken meals in every home. In this way, I
have rendered this village and its outskirts even more sanctified than
Vrundãvan.”

11

As Mahãrãj was saying this, a large ball of light appeared in the
sky, and then split into three distinct balls. They then hovered above
the mansion for a while and then disappeared.

12

Seeing this phenomenon, everyone asked, “Mahãrãj, what was
that?”
The Vachanãmrut

660

13

Shriji Mahãrãj revealed, “Everyday, Brahmã, Vishnu and Shiv
come for My darshan and the darshan of this assembly of sãdhus.
But today, by the wish of God, you have been able to see them along
with their celestial vehicles.”
|| Vachanãmrut Jetalpur-5 || 11 ||

Bhugol-Khagol
Regarding Geography and Astronomy
1

[From Kãrtik sudi 1 to Kãrtik sudi 11, Samvat 1863 [21
November 1806], under the harmo tree in Bhaktibãg, Gadhadã,
Shriji Mahãrãj dictated a letter to Shuk Muni addressed to His
followers. The letter included a description of pruthvi, the dwips and
the khands; the time span of the yugs; as well as a narration of the
various types of dissolution in reference to the rarity of attaining a
human birth in Bharat-khand. It incorporated the message of
striving for liberation rather than engaging too deeply in worldly
activities. A similar letter is also noted in the Harililãmrut [VI/1112]. Regardless of whether the letter mentioned in the Harililãmrut
is this same letter, it is just as significant, and so it is presented here
separately.]

2

“The Shrimad Bhãgwat and other sacred scriptures state that it
is extremely rare to receive a human birth in Bharat-khand, and
that it can be equalled to receiving a chintãmani. In fact, even Indra
and other deities long for a human birth. The vishays, the affluence
and opulence, as well as the lifespan of the deities greatly exceed that
of humans, yet they have no means of attaining liberation in their
own realms. Only after receiving a human birth in Bharat-khand
can one attain liberation. In no other place and with no other body is
liberation possible. For this reason, attaining a human birth in
Bharat-khand is better than being born in any of the other regions of
Mrutyulok. Thus, there is no place in the 14 realms that can
compare with Bharat-khand.

3

“Here are the names of those 14 realms, of which six are above
Mrutyulok: (1) Firstly, there is Bhuvarlok – where impure deities
reside. (2) Above that is Swarglok – where Indra and other deities
reside. (3) Next is Maharlok – where Aryam and other ancestral
deities reside. (4) Fourth is Janlok and (5) fifth is Taplok. Bhrugu
and other rishis stay in these two realms. (6) Finally, the sixth and
The Vachanãmrut

661

highest realm is Satyalok – where Brahmã resides. These are the
seven realms inclusive of Mrutyulok.
4

“Below Mrutyulok there are a further seven realms. In (1) Atal,
(2) Vital, and (3) Sutal, the demons reside. Below them are (4)
Talãtal, (5) Mahãtal, and (6) Rasãtal – in which nocturnal beings
reside. (7) Finally, serpents stay in the seventh realm, Pãtãl. These
seven realms are below Mrutyulok. This makes 14 realms in total, of
which Mrutyulok is the best.

5

“Mrutyulok comprises of seven concentric dwips: (1) In the
centre is Jambu-dwip, which is 100,000 yojans in size. It is
surrounded by a salt-water ocean that is also 100,000 yojans in size.
(2) Plaksh-dwip, the second dwip, is 200,000 yojans in size. It is
surrounded by an ocean that is also 200,000 yojans in size. The
water of this ocean is like that of ‘ikshu’, i.e., sugarcane juice. (3)
The third surrounding dwip is called Shãlmali-dwip. It is 400,000
yojans in size and a surrounding ocean that is also 400,000 yojans in
size. Its water is like that of ‘surã’, i.e., alcohol. (4) The fourth dwip,
Kush-dwip, is also circular. It is 800,000 yojans wide and has a
similar-sized surrounding ocean whose water is like that of ‘ghrut’,
i.e., ghee. (5) Next is the fifth dwip, Kraunch-dwip. It is 1,600,000
yojans in size and it also has an ocean of 1,600,000 yojans
surrounding it. Its water is like that of ‘kshir’, i.e., milk. (6) The
sixth dwip, called Shãk-dwip, is 3,200,000 yojans wide and has a
surrounding ocean of the same size. The water of this ocean is like
that of ‘dadhi-mandod’, i.e., yoghurt. (7) Finally, the seventh dwip is
called Pushkar-dwip. It is 6,400,000 yojans in size, it has a
surrounding ocean that is also 6,400,000 yojans in size. Its water is
as sweet as ‘sudhã’, i.e., amrut. These are the seven dwips that
make up Mrutyulok, of which Jambu-dwip is the best.

6

“Jambu-dwip itself comprises of nine khands. At the centre is
the golden Mount Meru. Surrounding its base on all four sides is the
landmass called Ilãvart-khand where there is the worship of
Sankarshan, and Shivji is the principal devotee. To the west of Meru
is Ketumãl-khand, which is also called by the name of Subhag.
There, Pradyumna is worshipped, and Lakshmiji is the principal
devotee. To the north of Meru, there are three khands: Ramyakkhand – where there is the worship of Matsya Bhagwãn, and Sãvarni
Manu is the main devotee; north of that is Hiranyamay-khand –
where there is the worship of Kurmaji, and Aryamã is the main
The Vachanãmrut

662

devotee; and north of that still is Kuru-khand – where there is the
worship of Varãh, and Pruthvi is the main devotee. This makes five
khands. To the east of Meru there is the khand called Bhadrãshwakhand – where Hayagriv is worshipped, and Bhadrashravã is the
principal devotee. South of Meru, there are a further three khands:
Harivarsh-khand – where there is the worship of Nrusinh, and
Prahlãd is the main devotee; south of that is Kimpurush-khand –
where there is the worship of Rãm-Lakshmiji, and Hanumãn is the
main devotee; and further south of that is Bharat-khand – where
there is the worship of Narnãrãyan, and Nãradji is the main devotee.
These are the nine khands of Jambu-dwip. Of these, Bharat-khand
is the best because although the other eight have a greater extent of
worldly pleasures to indulge in, one cannot attain liberation there –
endeavours for liberation are only possible in Bharat-khand. For this
reason, there is no place in the 14 realms equal to Bharat-khand.
7

“Within Bharat-khand, there are 13 regions which are ‘anãrya’,
that is to say, ignoble. They are: (1) Bangãl, (2) Nepãl, (3) Bhut, (4)
Kãmãkshi, (5) Sindh, (6) Kãbul, (7) Lãhor, (8) Multãn, (9) Irãn, (10)
Astambol, (11) Arbastãn, (12) Swãl, and (13) Pilpilãm. These 13
regions are impure. It is very difficult for someone who has taken
birth there to attain the association of a Sadguru – the granter of
liberation – and to understand the nature of liberation.

8

“Twelve-and-a-half regions in Bharat-khand are said to be ‘ãrya’,
i.e., noble. These are: (1) Purva, (2) Vraj, (3) Mãlav, (4) Mãru, (5)
Panjãb, (6) Gujarãt, (7) Dakshin, (8) Malbãr, (9) Tilang, (10) Drãvid,
(11) Bãrmalãr, (12) Sorath, and half of Kutch. These twelve-and-ahalf regions are superior. There, the Sant – a Sadguru who is a
knower of Brahma – is invariably present. Whosoever receives a
human birth in these regions is able to understand dharma, gnãn,
vairãgya and bhakti, and is able to realise the path to liberation.
How does he come to realise this? Well, these regions are called the
best because of the many avatãrs of God that manifest there. Thus,
all humans of Bharat-khand can attain liberation if they endeavour;
if they do not endeavour, they will not attain it. Therefore, one who
is wise should abandon violence and other such vices, renounce evil
influences, and seek the refuge of the Sadguru Sant who is a knower
of Brahma and serve him.

9

“The Sadguru Sant, whose characteristics are noted in the
sacred scriptures, is one who is endowed with all of the noble virtues
The Vachanãmrut

663

of dharma, gnãn, vairãgya, bhakti, etc. After recognising that Sant,
one should seek his refuge, keep one’s body, indriyas and antahkaran
in accordance with his commands, and engage in the worship of God.
This is the only means for attaining liberation. Whoever has done
this in the past, is presently doing so, or will do so in the future,
should be regarded as one who has best utilised his invaluable
human body, as one who has true understanding, and as one who is
eminent. Conversely, one who does not understand this, wastes such
an invaluable human birth by craving the insignificant pleasures of
the world, and by having faith in the words of a hypocritical,
misleading guru – who himself is prey to death. Even though the
latter person – who may be called understanding, eminent and wise
among the devotees – may be highly esteemed and famed in the
world, his esteem and fame are merely like a dream. Those who
assume such fame and esteem to be true and are infatuated by them,
but do not understand the path to liberation, are called fools and selfdestroyers by the Sant who is a knower of Brahma and by the sacred
scriptures. They would then have to wait a great deal of time before
receiving another human birth in such a place where liberation can
be attained.
10

“The duration of this wait is stated in the scriptures. One lav of
Brahmã is equal to our 666 years and eight months. Sixty such lavs
equal one nimish, which is the equivalent of our 40,000 years. Sixty
such nimishas equal one pal, which is the equivalent of our 2,400,000
years. Sixty such pals equal one ghadi, which is 144,000,000 years of
our years. Thirty such ghadis make a day of Brahmã, which is the
equivalent of our 4,320,000,000 years.

11

“The passing of four yugs is called a ‘chokdi’. Satya-yug lasts for
1,728,000 years; Tretã-yug for 1,296,000 years; Dwãpar-yug for
864,000 years; and Kali-yug for 432,000 years. This means one
‘chokdi’ is completed in 4,320,000 years; and one thousand such
‘chokdis’ pass in one day of Brahmã. That is, in one day of Brahmã,
14 Manus and 14 Indras reign and ultimately die. Each Manu and
each Indra reign for 308,571,428 years, six months, 25 days, 42
ghadis, 51 pals, 25 nimishes and 42 and 12/14 lavs. Fourteen such
Manus and Indras are created and destroyed during one day of
Brahmã. Countless creatures die throughout that day of Brahmã.
This is called nitya-pralay.

The Vachanãmrut

664

12

“When one night of Brahmã passes and Brahmã retires to sleep,
the ten realms inclusive of swarg, Mrutyulok and pãtãl are
destroyed. Brahmã’s night is as long as his day. Thus, one of
Brahmã’s night and day together lasts for our 8,640,000,000 years.
The lower ten realms of the brahmãnd are thus destroyed daily. At
the end of each day, a new set of realms is created, which in turn will
be destroyed as well. This is called nimitta-pralay, which is the
duration of Brahmã’s day.

13

“Thirty days of Brahmã make one month, 12 such months make
one year, and a hundred such years is the lifespan of Brahmã. When
Brahmã dies, the brahmãnd, consisting of the 14 realms, is
destroyed. Then, all of the entities that have evolved out of Prakruti
are assimilated back into Prakruti. This is called prãkrut-pralay.

14

“The fourth type of dissolution is ãtyantik-pralay. This is when
countless millions of brahmãnds are destroyed. At that time, even
Prakruti-Purush – the cause of Pradhãn-Purushes – draws countless
brahmãnds within itself, and is then eclipsed by the light of AksharPurushi . This, the fourth type of dissolution, is called ãtyantikpralay.

15

“At the time of creation, everything evolves from PrakrutiPurush in the exact reverse order from which it was assimilated
during the time of dissolution. I have thus described the four types of
dissolution.

16

“The third type of dissolution, prãkrut-pralay, is the end of the
lifespan of Brahmã. A jiva squanders its human body, which it
receives after 350,000,000 such prãkrut-pralays, for the sake of vain
worldly pleasures and by the refuge of a false guru. Consequently, it
has to suffer the torments of Yam and the agonies of the pits of
narak. Moreover, it receives another human birth in a place where
liberation is attainable only after passing through the sufferings of
the cycle of 8.4 million life forms3, i.e., after another three-and-a-half
prãkrut-pralays. This is the interval before one receives a human
birth again.

17

“Therefore, O brother, having understood this today, and having
sought the refuge of the Sadguru Sant – the granter of liberation –

i ‘Akshar-Purush’ in this context refers to ‘Aksharbrahma’.

The Vachanãmrut

665

and having kept your body, indriyas and antahkaran in accordance
with his wish, strive for the benefit of your ãtmã and reach the abode
of God. If you do not realise this fact today and waste this human
body, which is instrumental in attaining liberation, you will have to
wait for the aforementioned time before you receive another chance
like this. Only after such suffering and only at the end of that
interval will you receive another opportunity to attain liberation, and
that too if you strive for it. If you do not, you will not attain
liberation. This is a fundamental principle. The wise should ponder
over this. Fools, on the other hand, will never understand this since
they have no respect for the Shrutis or Smrutis.”
|| Bhugol-Khagol ||

|| End of Additional Vachanãmruts ||

The Vachanãmrut

666

